 Welcome to the European Central Bank podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Michael Steen and in this episode we'll be talking about inflation. This is the measure of the increase in prices of goods and services over time, and it is the key thing that most central banks look at. A bit like goldilocks in the fairy tale finding bears porridge that is neither too hot nor too cold, globally central banks want to find a balance on inflation. There should be a little, but definitely not too much. And whereas in the 1970s, it seemed that there was definitely far too much inflation, these days economists are puzzling over why inflation has been so low, and at times even too low. So in this episode we wanted to explore this topic. Why should prices go up? What drives inflation and what does the ECB do to keep prices stable? My first guest today is ECB executive board member and chief economist Philip R. Lane. Philip, welcome to the podcast. Thank you for having me. Can we start with just a very basic definition of inflation? What it means is how much prices over time go up? So if you like if you think about the euro in your pocket today, how much you can buy what one euro today is quite different to 20 years ago when the euro started? So we're okay with prices going up a little bit every year. In fact, if prices did not go up a little bit every year, it causes its own problems and maybe we can come back to that. But equally, it really is damaging to the economy, it's damaging to families, it's damaging to corporations if inflation goes up too quickly. So as you say, it's to strike the balance. The world history tells us a little too quickly. So as you say it's to strike the balance. The world history tells us many episodes where too high inflation has been very damaging. What we face right now is the challenge of inflation that is too low. And it's really an interesting time to work in the central bank because I think we more or less know how to fix inflation that's too high, fixing the inflation that is too low brings its own new challenges. Okay so let's talk about the the too low challenge a little bit. I mean I think it's counterintuitive for lots of people you know people would think well prices are not going up that's good isn't it? It is definitely good news for as of today if you took a snapshot today and you ask someone which do you prefer, do you prefer prices to be flat or even falling or do you prefer prices to go up? of course the answer is you prefer prices to be flat or falling. But when you take into account a whole economy and we take into account what happens over time, then it becomes a problem. Let's take your typical worker, there's a deep connection between what's happening to prices and what's happening to wages. So if you rephrase that question and said, I'm going to tell you that your wage is going to go more slowly over time, what's going to be your attitude? So I'm not so happy about that. No more pay rises ever. Well, you know, with the economy getting more productive over time, there would be wage rises. But there is, I think, a problem which is, you know, in the end, when we get to it, why do we want inflation to be closer towards two and not stuck at one or even falling towards zero? Why we want that is it, if you like to use a phrase, it provides some oil in the economy, some lubricant. If you have a system where everyone is expecting prices to go up a little bit every year, then it turns out, I mean this is the historical evidence, it turns out the economy moves more smoothly and in particular, and this is really I think the most important issue, is let's say some bad news arrives, let's say there's a recession in the future. If going into that recession you have inflation where it should be in the neighbourhood of 2% then what that means is the ability of us as the European Central Bank to stabilize the economy to stabilize prices when there's a negative shock is so much greater than if inflation were stuck at 1 or 0. So it really provides the resilience in the economy. It allows the ECB to provide a guarantee of stability. This is very much a stability-orientated central bank. And for that stability, the paradox maybe is either one to stabilize around zero, you want to stabilize around a number more or less 2%. By the way, every central bank in the world has reached a same conclusion. At 2% is the target for the Federal Reserve, the People's Bank of China, Bank of Canada, Bank of England, everywhere there's a strong consensus on this. The ECB formulation is close to but below 2% but that's ballpark very similar. I see. And as you say, there is this huge global consensus around the 2% figure. Although there's also been a bit of debate hasn't there about some people saying shouldn't it be more, some people particularly here where we are at the moment in Germany saying shouldn't it be less. Maybe just tease out that point again on if it was lower what is it that and the central bank faces a shock how is the central central bank then constrained in how it can act? So one of the strongest laws of economics is the direct connection between inflation and interest rates. So if you have a world where inflation is hovering around two, and let's say underneath that in terms of the underlying real performance for the economy, what we call a real rate of interest, is also let's say two, put that together, then you would have our policy rate, the ECB rate around four. So if in good times you have an interest rate at four then when a bad stock happens you can imagine we can do a lot of monetary accommodation we can cut the interest rate from four all the way down close to zero. If instead you start where inflation is at zero even even if the underlying economy is similar, then the peak interest rate is at two and the inability to fight a down negative shock is so much less. So again, it's a very interesting issue because of course as of today, is it a big problem, does inflation at one? It's not a problem as of today, but it does mean if there's a problem, a negative shock in the future, a slowdown in the future, we would be less effective. Another aspect is of course in terms of where when we're looking at our inflation objective, we talk famously of this medium term, so it's not what inflation is right now, we're looking ahead a little bit. Can you explain why is that element important? So I think there's two elements to that. One is again it's very solidly founded in evidence that the our multi-polic decisions take a while to hit the economy because essentially we are changing conditions in the financial markets. You or I are not directly trading in terms of the financial markets. So what we have to rely on is how the bags on those markets convert the financial conditions they see in the money market into your mortgage rate, your rate for a car loan, the rate of lending to a small and medium enterprise and so on. So all of that takes time and then in turn a firm may have a decision process, it may take a number of months to say okay we see these lending rates are lower, let's make a plan to do more investment. That takes time. A consumer may take time to say, well, let's do a home renovation. That takes time to work out. We also know that sometimes inflation dynamics are quite gradual, which is definitely true at the moment, and that's why we are patient in hitting our target. In other times, inflation dynamics can be quite intense. And so the medium term, I think, is an appropriate formulation. It conveys that it's not overnight, but it conveys the urgency is that it's not 10 years from now we care about. And that's why you need the patients. But turning a bit back to the ECB then, we talked already about how global central banks all converge around this roughly 2% inflation objective. At the ECB, of course, we have the treaty defines our mandate as price stability. The ECB's governing council then at some point decided that was close to but below 2%. How does that evolve over time? Is there anything that needs to change there? There's been talked by President Mario Draggy about some kind of review of the of the framework coming up. How do you see this and you know to what extent should we be adjusting what we're doing? So the last major review of the target was in 2003, which is 16 years ago. So I think any organization probably wants to review its strategy more frequently than that. Now the good reasons why there's been a delay, I mean most obviously the global crisis that really kicked off in 07 and 08 has meant there were other priorities. I mean, to be honest, I mean, I think for a long time that formulation of close to but below 2% was essentially so close to 2% that maybe it didn't matter. So when, for example, the Federal Reserve adopted 2% in 2012, is there a big difference between saying our target is 2 versus saying our target is below but close to 2? I think that's something for a review to reflect upon, but I think it cannot be doubted. Any difference between those formulations is more salient when you're having inflation below target because the question is what is enough? It made sense at the time. So the founding fathers of the euro area, they were imperative in the early years of the euro, was to make sure ever understood that inflation above 2% were not tolerated because of course many countries had a history of high inflation. So the formulation at that time I think sent a good signal that we really want inflation not to exceed 2. Right now the bigger issue I think now is convincing everyone that inflation will return to the target whether you're hitting a target of close to below 2% or be more precise about a 2% target. That is something we're discussing in a review. Philip, thank you very much for joining us. My pleasure. Our next guests are Christina, Nicole and Frank Smets. Christina and her team are in charge of monitoring and analyzing inflation and wage developments in the euro area. She's done a lot of research on the causes of low inflation and wage developments in the euro area. She's done a lot of research on the causes of low inflation and low wage growth, but also on structural drivers of inflation like demography and globalisation. Frank has worked at the ECB for over 20 years in a number of senior positions, including time as an advisor to President Mario Draggy. He now manages the teams in charge of forecasting economic developments and policies and he even has an inflation model named after him. This work involves monitoring and analyzing inflation data and advising the ECB's governing council on monetary policy decisions. Now in the previous conversation we already mentioned that inflation is obviously at the very core of what we do as a central bank. But what does it mean in practice? So, Kristian, if I can turn to you to start with, can you tell us a little bit about how price developments are measured and how does this translate into defining monetary policy? Now, in the euro area, we measure this consumer price inflation by the harmonised index of consumer prices, the HICP. And the term harmonize denotes the fact that all the countries in the European Union follow the same methodology. This ensures that the data for one country can be compared with the data for another. This HICP is not calculated by us, by the ECB, but by the national statistical institutes for for each euro area country, and it's later on then added up also by Eurostat. Now, when you look at what is covered by this HICP, it is exactly like this idea of going to the supermarket and shop for a basket of goods. It measures the average change over time in the prices paid by host poles for a specific, regularly updated basket of consumer goods and services. So who decides what's in the basket? It's basically the international statistical institutes that decide what is representative also for their country, and they regularly update this basket of goods so that it basically stays also up to date with latest developments in how also consumer behavior changes. Okay so different countries might have slightly different baskets. Yes but still it's harmonised in the sense that each country doesn't deviate too much let's say from the common standard that we have for the whole of the European Union. And crucially not done by us so we're not sort of marking our own homework? No, exactly. Now maybe turning to Frank, Philip Lane touched on the point that prices have been rising a bit more slowly in the past years. What actually makes the prices rise in the first place and why is inflation been so low recently? Well there are many factors that can lead to rising wages and prices. probably the most popular framework to explain changes in inflation is the so-called Phillips curve. This is a model that was named after Professor Phillips, who was an economist at the London School of Economics in the 1950s, who at that time noted a clear negative relationship between unemployment and wage inflation. So when few people are looking for work and the labour market is tight, then the employers have to raise wages to attract those workers. And inflation is high. And the reverse, if unemployment is high, the ability of workers to demand higher wages will be limited and inflation will be low. Remember unemployment in the euro area was more than 12% at its peak in 2013 and that put downward pressure on wages and inflation. But then as the economy recovered, partly also because of the stimulus by the central bank, people get employed and unemployment fell to levels that are now close to where they were before the crisis. And so also wages and prices started to recover. And so wage inflation now is basically back to average levels. What's still missing a little bit is price inflation. So the pass through from wages to inflation has been a bit slower than usually. There is a debate about whether the Phillips curve is dead, which is a vibrant debate in the academic literature. If you want to know more about that you can look at an inflation conference that Cristiana organized a couple of weeks ago and two of the keynote speakers came with a definite answer that at least in the euro area the Phillips curve is alive and and kicking and therefore we're also quite confident that as the economy further recovers and continues to grow inflation will eventually also converge to 2% so there's a there's a process here we had the crisis we had huge unemployment unemployment has now been going down a lot, that means that wages have started to go up and now you would expect prices to come up afterwards. Is that a fair sign? Yes. Now, of course, there are other factors also that determine inflation and that some of these factors have actually put a lid on inflation. One very important one is oil prices, because that is a very volatile price, which is basically determined in international commodity markets, but has a direct impact on the cost of energy. And so that is another factor that has actually had a downward impact on inflation of the past three to four years, particularly because of course there are demand and supply factors in the oil market, but the new technologies such as fracking technology has actually increased the supply of oil and put down the price. Yeah, and of course everyone needs energy to heat the houses or move around for transport and so on, so that's why that's such a big factor. Yes, it's one of the bigger components in the price index that Christiana mentioned. There's some other things at work here, like Christiana, like the so-called structural factors where we start talking about things like globalisation, aging populations and even e-commerce. Can you talk us through some of those aspects and some of the work that you've done? I mean, most importantly, I would like to say up front, that's still what Frank just mentioned, you know, the drivers of the Phillips curves are still, I think, the most important way of explaining inflation as we see it today. However, there are these other factors that you mentioned, these structural factors in addition to the cyclical factors, for example, you have e-commerce and digitalization that have become much more important in recent years. So for example, digitalization poses a challenge to the measurement of inflation. Just think of Netflix or Spotify and these new offers replace the traditional products like CDs and DVDs. Now with these new products, it's of course difficult to know what will be the weight in the basket and it is also difficult to know exactly how to basically apprise these new products. It is just an example of how difficult it is to really keep this basket basically up to date. And if you look at the rise of e-commerce and online shopping, we also know that nowadays it's much easier to compare prices with each other because you know what is online and you can actually also go to the supermarket or to the shop and negotiate for your price. And with this kind of competition, actually also put basically a lid on how much prices can adjust. Because that's people literally standing in the shop with their smartphone saying to the shopkeeper look I can get this from here for this will you match the price? Exactly, exactly and these are kind of indirect effects of of e-commerce or digitalisation and they are also difficult to to measure let's say why the usual way we have our harmonized index of consumer prices and that we normally look at. We find overall that there has been a small negative effect of e-commerce on inflation but this effect is hard to pin down using only the data that is at an aggregated level and this is why we also have efforts in the ECB to actually look at more disaggregated data and data that in particular comes from the internet. Aging populations, why would that have an effect on inflation? We see that the structure of the of the of the population has very much changed in the large the last 40 years. And if you look at population aging, one example that springs to mind is Japan, where quite a number of studies have pointed out that demographics fix has been a deflationary force. And if you look at the demographic developments in Europe, we see that there is a positive long-run relationship between inflation and the growth rate of the working age population. Now, why is that? One reason is, for example, or could be, that indeed, let's say the savings behavior of people has changed. Because you know that you live longer, you also save more and spend less. And spend less. And that of course has then an impact also on inflation at the aggregate. But I just wanted to point out that with demographics, we are still, let's say, at the very early stages of research, the jury is still out, of course demographics is a development that is very slow therefore not easy to capture like in frameworks like in the Phillips curve and we also know that we will move to a new equilibrium with demographic so at some point these impact that we see may actually come to an end or may not be as strong as we may see it at the moment. So tell us a little bit about globalisation. How is that affecting inflation around, particularly in the euro area? We have seen more globalisation and integration in global value change, and this might increase the dependence of domestic inflation on global developments. For example, if you look at global value chains, we know that nowadays companies can produce their inputs all across the world. And if a company in Germany sees that it can get its imported goods from somewhere else or can produce in a different production facility somewhere else in the world. It basically gets the input then from the cheapest possible country. That of course will also reduce costs and eventually might also lead to lower costs in the production of this good. So we've seen these are all big changes, big structure changes. might also lead to lower costs in the production of this good. So we've seen that these are all big changes, big structural changes. Now a phrase that you sometimes hear or read is this thing about new normal. Does that mean that lower inflation is the new normal? No, I think many of these structural changes are one-off changes that have persistent but typically temporary effects on inflation. Christiana, anything to add to that? I would say that as Frank already mentioned these are long run but also drivers that eventually should lead to some kind of new equilibrium. So for example e-commerce is a factor where not every shop will close just because there's online pricing. We've seen it in the US that there has been a rather strong impact of online purchases in the past but this effect has been slowing down. So in other words, it just needs a bit more patience so that we basically see that eventually also inflation may rise again. So turning back to the ECB and particularly your two jobs, and I think this is a great moment since we've got you on the podcast to ask you about this, one of the things that the ECB obviously does when it's trying to set monetary policy is to forecast or project where inflation is going to go? You're both closely involved in that whole exercise. Can you talk us through that a little bit? Yes, we produce basically forecasts for economic growth, inflation, employment, wages, and a whole host of economic and macroeconomic variables four times a year, typically in March, June, September and December variables. wages and a whole host of economic and macroeconomic variables four times a year typically in March, June, September, and December. These twice a year these forecasts are actually done by the National Central Banks and the role of ECB is to basically aggregate give feedback and aggregate the numbers in a euro area forecast. That's in June and December and twice a year it's basically an update that is being done by the ECB itself. Again, in consultation with the national central banks, because of course those central banks have a lot of the intimate knowledge of their economy, which improves our analysis and our forecasts. The horizon of our forecasts, of our macroeconomic projections, as we call them, is between two and three years. And the further away is the harder it is. I mean, to be a bit mean, I mean, we're often criticized for getting them wrong. I think that's the same for all forecasts is everywhere, but so can you explain a bit the difficulty in this exercise?? Well I mean that's that's of course the difficulty of any forecast and there's basically two main sources of the forecast errors that we make I mean the first source is that I mean the economy is subject to news and shocks all the time and by definition news is not forecastable. So if there's new developments on trade tariffs in the trade war that can have an impact on on the economy through the effect of uncertainty on investment and on trade and basically lead our forecast of inflation to fall. Now as long as we don't have that news we can't really tell that this effect will be there. So there's a lot of uncertainty about those shocks that affect. Another example is the oil prices. If a war starts in the Middle East and that immediately has an impact on oil prices, oil prices will increase and that will have an effect on energy prices and inflation. So that's probably the most important source when we try to decompose. Why do we make errors? It's often because we haven't foreseen what happened to energy prices or food prices which are very volatile and respond to factors we cannot forecast, such as the weather, for example. The other part is, and this comes back to the previous discussion, that of course the way the economy works changes all the time. And of course, when we do a forecast, we look at the data and we use our models, macro-economic metric models to interpret those data and forecast what will happen to economic growth and inflation. Now, these models are based on historical regularities. They are estimated on the past. And of course, the future doesn't have to be like the past, as we've discussed. Globalization has changed some of the effects of imported inflation. Similarly, e-commerce has an impact on how firms set their prices. And so in our forecasting process, we have to continuously update our models in order to sort of keep track of the changing economy. Actually, that's one of the reasons why the of keep track of the changing economy. Actually, that's one of the reasons why the third important element of any forecast is judgment. That's really all the information that we cannot capture by the standard data or by the standard models. And that's nevertheless important in forming a view of on the inflation outlook. Why is it so important as a central bank that we're doing these forecasts and that we're getting them as accurate as we can? Well, the forecasts are a summary of the inflation outlook and economic outlook of the euro area and therefore a very important input for the Montrepocy deliberations of the governing council. and forecasts are important because, as we mentioned before, Montreal City works with a lack. When the governing council reduces the interest rate now, then this has an impact on growth a year out, and on inflation two to three years out. So in order to stabilize inflation, we need to know what inflation what our view is on inflation two to three years out and that is really given by the forecast. Okay great. Well Frank Cristiana good luck with a ongoing challenging role that you have and thanks a lot for joining us on the podcast today. Thank you. That's just about it for this episode. It's been fascinating to hear from my expert guests, Philip Lane, Christiana Nickle and Frank Smets. We're working hard at the ECB, trying to keep inflation in that Goldilocks zone. Not too hot, not too cold, neither too low, nor too high. And we've discussed a little bit how this all works in practice. What inflation means to you, how price developments are measured, and the structural issues that can make it such a tricky job. Do also look in the show notes for links to relevant papers and publications from the ECB. And if you have any thoughts on this episode or suggestions for topics you'd like us to cover in future episodes you can get in touch with us on social media via direct messages and comments. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Michael Steen. If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review. Until next time, thanks for listening.