 Welcome to the European Central Bank podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Michael Steen and in today's episode we will cover the impact of coronavirus on the economy. Now I say the economy as that's our focus at the ECB, but it's worth taking a moment to reflect that this is a gruesome disease with a spiraling death toll. Each one of those numbers that updates daily represents a tragedy for the families and friends of those who died. To try to keep everyone safe, many of us have been urged to stay at home. That's had some fairly stark effects on the economy. People are buying less. Companies are producing less. Whole sectors have just come to a stop. People have lost jobs or have greater uncertainty about their jobs. In this episode we're trying to understand the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic and the ECB's response to it. We're joined by ECB executive board member and chief economist Philip Lane. Philip thanks a lot for being with us. Philip Lane. Philip, thanks a lot for being with us. Good morning. Now this is a bit of a peculiar setup of course. I'm at my desk at home just outside Frankfurt and you're in Dublin I believe. Where are you and how are you doing? So for the last few weeks I've been working from home. As you know the executive board has been working on a split team basis so in these weeks I've worked from home. So far that has turned out okay. I think the ECB is built on a lot of teamwork and I suppose my my observation is if that teamwork has already been in place so now it's nearly a year since I joined the ECB. So if you know the people very well then the fact that the day-to-day meetings are over the internet, over the phone line, is okay because you already know, if you like, the people you're talking with, we can work quite effectively at least for a while from home. That's the philosophy behind how the board is working. Well, to start off with, let's maybe talk a bit about the economy as a whole and how the economy as a while from home. That's the philosophy behind how the board is working. Well, to start off with, let's maybe talk a bit about the economy as a whole and how the coronavirus pandemic has affected it. What are your observations? Where we are now, here we are at mid-May, is probably at the very bottom of the economic impact of the virus. You know, of course, China in the first few weeks of 2020 had a big hit. We've seen China now starting to recover a little bit. But for the European economy, you know, in some countries, it's early March. For more countries, it is mid-March when the severe restrictions came into play. And only now in the middle of May is there some relaxation. So in these weeks where a lot of, if you like, face-to-face economic activity has been restricted, this has been a really spectacular decline in economic activity, it's very hard to look backwards and find previous examples because, you know, sometimes people say, oh, this is like the Great Depression. It's not in the sense of the week by week decline in economic activity is more rapid this time, but under the hand, we do know as the restrictions are lifted, not going back to the old normal, but on the other hand we do know as the restrictions are lifted, not going back to the old normal, but some level of recovery in economic activity can be expected. But if you like everyone who's looking at the European economy, the world economy, is agreeing that right now at the second quarter of 2020 will be the bottom. And then in the coming weeks and months, we will have some recovery. But the big open question is how quickly would that recovery happen? Over what time period? Because, you know, I think we can all agree that what we expect now is social distancing and also the personal attitudes to economic activity are going to remain subdued until a vaccine is found. So it's not just a case of lifting the severe restrictions, it's also a case of working out how to adapt how we do business, how we consume, how we invest over the coming months. Okay and that's a bit this concept of the new normal, right? So we go back, but it's not like what it was before, exactly, at least for the time being. Right, I think there's two sides that on the supply side, it does make it more difficult to conduct normal economic life. So, you know, every day you can read about how offices have to reconfigure how shopping has to be reconfigured. And then when you think about global supply chains, even just the coordination issue, which is around the world, a given city might be ready, but it's relied on inputs from somewhere else in the world. And then on the you know demand side the question is when will people feel comfortable for example taking a vacation? When will people feel comfortable going to a restaurant? So there's many open questions there and then on investment you know it's not exactly the conditions under which firms will want to commit to large-scale projects, given all the uncertainty. Okay, we've clearly had a lot of bad news recently. Hospitals and healthcare workers have been struggling in some countries to deal with the crisis, so-called key workers and public transportation or the food industry have carried on working. Now you mentioned this very dramatic decline we've seen caused by essentially a sudden stop for big parts of the economy. So which sectors in the euro area have been or will be hit the most, would you say? Well I think the key characteristic is really the face-to-face element because of course as we all have discovered you can do a certain amount of economic activity remotely through the internet whether that's as we just talked about organizations producing services in particular remotely. But of course you can also do to a degree online shopping, but that doesn't really work for tourism, it's very big sector. It doesn't work for transportation. So whether that's personal travel, business travel, it doesn't work for that. It doesn't work for hotels. So that whole sector of trade transport food services has been hit. Entertainment, you know, that's a big part of in a high income society, an important part of economic activity, is arts, entertainment recreation, sports and so on. That's been hit a lot. For a while construction halted it in a lot of places, even though that's one of the first sectors to recover. Manufacturing, as we mentioned, if you're in an industry where essentially you're waiting for vital inputs to arrive, you may not be able to produce, but of course also when you're producing highly valuable goods, where it is a limit to how much he can stock them up for sale later on, then the fact that it's just impossible for example, nearly impossible to sell cars for example in this environment, then then the car factories have to have to pause to a good degree. So you know there's a lot going on. Okay. So if we turn to the policy response, I mean, we've seen a lot of measures already taken, governments introducing guarantees and that kind of thing, fiscal responses, we've had responses at a European level, and also at the national level. But if we look at the ECB, what is our role in this crisis and exactly how does monetary policy or how can monetary policy help here? So it's a very special situation where monetary policy is vitally important in a fundamentally different way to normal. Most of the time, and if you go back two or three months, our kind of focus was, how do we provide the market policy to help inflation recover towards our aim of close to 2%? So that's the normal focus of market policy. It's about delivering price stability. Now, with this shock, when it came along, there were two big issues. One, when you have a dramatic downturn in the economy, that threatens price stability, because of course, a very large reversal in the economy is also a situation where disciplinary pressures are likely. So we have to respond to that. A second issue, of course, is in a situation where there's a lot of lost revenue, many firms have lost revenue for a few weeks or months, there's a big demand for liquidity, because of course, a firm that was in good shape at the very least may need to borrow for a few weeks to maintain a cash flow. So liquidity needs went up a lot and third this is a really large shock in financial markets so if you like the normal activities of debt markets in particular are interrupted when you have to revise your beliefs about the world in such a big way. So the ECB, if you like, on those three fronts, one is in terms of the funding conditions in the economy, the path of interest rates, two is in terms of liquidity and three is in terms of market stabilization. So whether it's the ECB or the other major central banks, we've been extremely busy to address those issues. Essentially through very large liquidity operations with our flagship targeted lending program through stepping up of our asset purchases, especially through the new pandemic emergency purchase program to PEP, and also, which really serves two functions. One is to stabilize the securities markets, so whether that's commercial paper, corporate debt, suffering that there's a stabilization role, but also in a world where the interest rate is already very low, it's our main way to keep the path of interest rates, short-term rates, medium-term rates, long-term rates, low enough to provide the conditions under which households and firms can obtain funding at a reasonable rate. So that's the playbook. And let me emphasize, this is all in the context of a remarkable role for fiscal policy. The lessons from a previous large shocks, the Great Depression, and so on, is that it's very important that the shock is not compounded by, for example, a loss of household income. So what we've seen is governments around the world stepping in with large transfer programs, whether that's unemployment payments or payments to firms to help meet their payroll costs. And so this has really has been very dramatic period for fiscal policy and for monetary policy. Okay, and the two things are crucial to go together because the monetary policy is not going... Well, I mean, yes, go, sorry, go ahead. Sorry, yeah, so the identity go together, it's very important to make this point, especially when, you know, we often talk about central bank independence, is this large shock is independently, calling for a very responsive monetary policy and a very responsive fiscal policy. So it's essentially the situation does call for a lot of policy action on both fronts. Essentially the almost the definition of liquidity it bridges a gap but the ultimate you know hit on firms on households has to be met by fiscal policy. Central banks on their own can only do so much so that there's absolutely central role fiscal policy. What banks on their own can only do so much. So there's absolutely central role of fiscal policy. What's also true is the effectiveness of fiscal policy would be less if the liquidity provision and the interest rate policy of central banks did not respond to this shock. OK, and if we just go a little bit deeper into those two big responses by the ECB so we've got the pandemic emergency purchase program which is asset purchases or a form of QE that we've we've added and then on the other hand we've got the the targeted lending operations that the targeted longer term refinancing operations or telltros in the jargon. So if we just look at the first one the the pandemic emergency purchase program the PEP that that's of the three things that you mentioned that if I if I'm understanding you correctly that's to target two of those contingencies it's's basically, one big part is this idea of calming financial markets, but the other big one is dealing with this disinflationary hit that's caused by the sudden stop to economic activity. Is that a good summary or you're probably going to correct me? Exactly, so it plays that double role. By the way, they go together, the kind of a market stabilization problem will be more severe if interest rates were higher. But equally if the market stabilization was not handled, then the impact on risk premium on market frictions and so on would push interest rates up. So they go together and this is why maybe it's not so easy for someone trying to understand PEP to have an exact, if you like, numerical split between those two functions. And because they're intertwined, you know, it's important conceptually to make that distinction even though of course the same asset purchases are plain bubbles. Maybe it's worth having a quick word on inflation because you've said that this is a big disinflationary shock from the pandemic. I was watching the local German TV last night. They had a very nice report about how vegetable prices and fruit prices had gone up in the supermarket because, for example, lemons grown in Spain. You now see the people picking the lemons have to be socially distant. They have to come on a big bus, which costs more for the farmer to provide. And then the transport of the lorry driving from Spain to Germany costs more because on the way back to Spain, it doesn't have anything to put into it. So their message was, oh look, prices are going up. But actually I think what we're saying is we expect, on balance, prices to go down. Right, so I mean, it's absolutely correct. It's visible, I think a lot lot of countries, for example, that kind of a perishable food item is going up in price right now. So there's certainly a degree of circumstantial inflation, that if you are in a sector which has a very high demand, so supermarkets are quite busy. And at the same time, as you say, there are kind of new cost components because of the social distancing and other dimensions. There will be particular types of prices that go up, but in the overall scheme of the whole European economy, many firms are facing the situation of a much lower demand they used to face. So as the economy recovers, as these firms try to throw up business, try to convince households which are maybe quite nervous about spending, then there's a lot of a lot of downward price pressure. So I think, you know, it's hard, by the way, going back even to the Great Depression, we know when we've had these really large slumps before, the dominant initial dynamic is going to be disciplinary. I agree. There's an open question about the medium term, about maybe whether there's also some forces in the opposite direction. But by the way, some of the forces in the opposite direction will be the outcome of failure. So for example, if we if there's a failure to maintain the productive capacity of the economy, if too many firms go out of business and they don't come back, if too many workers become unemployed and get trapped in a kind of long-term unemployment problem, then the productive capacity of an economy will decline in the medium term. And that on its own is a force that would not be good for the inflation outlook. So I think I wouldn't find any reassurance in scenarios where people will say well because the you know decline in economic potential inflation is going to be more likely. So you know but I think that for now for the horizon of module policy of making sure the next number of months are we do what we can, I think the pressure is mostly disciplinary. Okay, so looking at the other thing that we're doing, these targeted longer-term refinancing operations or telltros, that's about liquidity which you already spoke about about but maybe we can go a bit further on that one. The idea there is basically to ensure that banks are still in a position that they can lend to firms and households. Right, so in a big downturn the temptation for banks is to pull back is that oftentimes we are seeing that even though firms and hassles are looking to borrow to smooth out the impact of the downturn under expenditure, banks are looking at the downturn and saying, well, maybe it's too risky to make lending decisions. So what the targeted lending program does is it provides very generous funding to banks, but conditional on maintaining lending program does, is it provides very generous funding to banks but conditional on maintaining lending. So it basically offsets the kind of temptation to have a credit squeeze in a recession by providing the incentive to maintain lending. And you know I think this is now the third generation of targeted lending programs at the ECB. We've learned a lot. We understand that these can work quite effectively and all the indications are, is that this new target program will be quite effective in the coming weeks and months in ensuring that the downturn that we face is not made worse by by credit screens. You've mentioned several times already the the the great depression and some of the historical comparisons that are being drawn. So maybe let's finish with a perhaps unfairly impossible question, but you can give us some indication of where your thinking is, which is the long-term effects of this crisis on our economy. What are your sort of initial thoughts on that? Where does this lead to? Of course, I'm sure we're all reading the same stories. For individual sectors, it's possible to imagine the long-term effects and the future of the office, the future of travel and so on. But from a lot of that it's going to be reallocation if you like. Some sectors will see increased demand or the sectors may see reduced amount. So for the ECB our major focus is on the overall macro effect and there I think it remains the case that unlike the Great Depression, this should not last a very long time. There should be a significant recovery. And if you like the major damage to the long term, it would be if you like if there were policy failures that made the crisis worse than otherwise and led to longer term in activity where the level of demand and the economy doesn't recover sufficiently to to allow full employment to return. So I think fiscal policy and multi policy makers have a heavy responsibility and outside of those policy areas, of course the major factor is going to be the public health challenge of getting this virus under control. Okay, Philip, thank you very much and thank you so much for for joining us on the on the line over from from Dublin. I hope the internet played along okay with both of us there. Okay, thank you, Michael. Thank you. Thank you, Philip. This brings us to the end of this episode. We've seen that in the current extreme situation brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, the ECB is determined to support people, firms and banks through the current crisis. Stay tuned for our next episode, which we'll discuss how the coronavirus crisis has impacted financial markets and what our role is there as a central bank. As usual we'll link to a few publications by the ECB in the show notes as well as other related information, including our web pages that aim to explain the ECB's measures and plain language. We'd love to hear your feedback and thoughts for future episodes via social media. You can use direct messages and comments. You've been listening to the European Central Bank podcast with Michael Steen. If you like what you've heard please subscribe and leave us a review. Until next time, thanks for listening.