 Welcome to the ECB podcast bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Michael Steen and in today's episode we'll talk about a digital euro. In the last two episodes we've talked about the impact of digitalisation on jobs and how it transforms the way we work. But it's not just that digitalisation has spread to every corner of our lives. It affects how we live, how we consume and interact with each other. It also affects how we pay. More and more people are paying with cards, phones, watches, rings, and there's some evidence that the coronavirus pandemic has accelerated. Contactless payment means and other forms of paying. Now currently when you pay like that you're interacting with money in your bank account or on your credit card. But what if you could have the digital equivalent of a banknote or coin? Earlier this month, the ECB released a report on exactly this question, the possibility of a central bank digital currency, the digital euro. With me here today is Orich Binsal, who's responsible for market infrastructures and payments here at the ECB. Thanks a lot for joining us, Oruich. Thanks, Michael, for inviting me. Oruff, you were part of this high-level task force with representatives from national central banks from across the euro area who wrote the report. But before we get into the detail on that, I think it's probably important to touch very briefly again on this big topic of what is money. And here I think it's important that we talk about two particular classifications and that is central bank money which is currently essentially bank notes as far as most people are concerned right? The only way you or I really touch so-called central bank money is if we have a bank note and then everything else which is commercial money and that's basically all the money on our bank accounts whenever we make a payment electronically at the moment and that also is effectively issued by the bank where our account is. Can you just talk us through those differences and what the difference between those two categories is? Yeah, sure Michael. If we look today at how we use the two forms of money, we can again distinguish the three functions of money. So unit of account as mentioned comes from the central bank. As a store of value, we can observe that commercial bank money really dominates. So 90% of total money is commercial bank money. The stocks of bank notes much lower around 10% of what we hold with our commercial banks as a side deposits in particular. So overwhelmingly what's out there is commercial money. But then if we start talking about digital currencies and specifically a digital euro, are we then talking about a kind of digital equivalent of a bank note? Yeah, that's a good simple definition. But let me distinguish the three functions of money briefly. Unit of account is given by the central bank today. It's not given by a precious metal coin or whatever as it was in the past. Store of value, we can say that commercial bank money by far dominates central bank money because people you know hold much higher deposits with their banks, side deposits in particular, which are around 10 times what we hold in banknotes. But the third function is the means of payment function of money. And here still we have a predominance of banknotes of cash relative to commercial bank money, which we typically use for payment in the form of cards or related payment solutions. So there we have in terms of value of payments, currently an equivalence between the two or it may be that card payments have just overtaken cash payments in terms of value. In terms of volumes in shops in the euro area there is still 75% of payments take the form of cash and only 25% in the form of cards. And of course in other payment usages the electronic payments, commercial bank, money payments, have been predominating for a long time. For example, when firms, commercial bank, money payments, have been predominating for a long time. For example, when firms pay their supplier, pay their employees, pay taxes, they always pay electronically in commercial bank money. If we come now to the definition again of digital euro, I mean, as you put it, it is bank notes in electronic forms forms and in the sense that banknotes have been accessible to all of us. Every firm, every citizen, even every foreigner, can hold euro banknotes. There are no restrictions. While electronic central bank money so far could be held only by commercial banks in the form of deposits with the central bank and a so-called central bank digital currency in our case a digital euro would combine the two, it would be electronic but accessible to everyone. Okay, and it's sort of in the context of this rapid digitalization and people using electronic means of payment more often. But with the difference that you're getting access directly to so-called central bank money, we see a lot whenever we issue a report on the digital euro or wherever we talk about this subject, we get lots of comments from people who are supporters of Bitcoin and other crypto assets. Now we already did a whole episode on that of course, which you're welcome to go back and listen to. But I think what's maybe interesting here is how do we answer the question? Well, if there are these other things out there like Bitcoin or Libra, why does Central Banks need to get involved and where do you see the difference there? Before talking about Bitcoin and Libra, let me come back to what you mentioned beforehand that people indeed pay more and more electronically, you know, and it's a clear trend that has been accelerated in recent years and even accelerated somewhat more with the COVID crisis and why is that so? So obviously electronic payments are convenience, you know, you don't have coins, you don't have change, you don't have to go to an ATM and withdraw banknotes. And then there have been lots of technological advancements in recent years, which made it even more convenient to pay electronically. For instance instance contactless payments without a pin code has recently been increased to a ceiling of 50 euro and a geometric recognition allowing for contactless payments with mobile phones is of fantastic convenience now. So while on the banknote side you could say the technology hasn't changed for hundreds of years, you know, if you pay with the banknotes, it's still the same as if it was long time ago. So it's a bit an imbalance. One, you know, becomes more and more convenient. The other stays always the same. that naturally leads to a higher use of what is progressing. And of course, also for e-for e-e also for e-commerce you cannot use banknotes. So all of that creates a trend to electronic payments and then you mentioned crypto assets such as Bitcoin's and then also Libra which is a bit different but Bitcoin is not really you know we would say it's not money it's it's fluctuating in its value it is more like a commodity you know it's it fluctuates like oil or gold yeah and it's not very trustworthy maybe I mean some like it some like the idea that it has no central authority or no private issue are responsible for it some like it others may say this is a bit a bit special and I don't want it. And it's not regulated anyway. So let's say the risk is really for the user public authorities have no responsibility there. And Libra is a bit different. I mean first Libra is just a project for the moment. It doesn't exist yet. I think it is more similar at the end to commercial bank money because it contains a promise of convertibility and to central bank money, is not so different from commercial bank money but it tries to avoid the definition and so it is still quite unclear what it is exactly and regulation of it is still unclear. So and it's the future you know nobody has yet paid with Leibach. Okay but so I'm very happy actually paying personally with my card or my watch or my phone. Delighted recently to discover that my bakery will finally accept the watches a payment method despite years demanding only banknotes and that's a bit also driven by the coronavirus pandemic, has changed some of these payment starts. Even in Germany, even here in Germany, exactly. So the change is really genuinely happening. In fact, when I told someone about that recently, they just didn't believe me that it was true. I said I maybe should take a picture of it, but I haven't done that. But the question is, so if I'm comfortable using these commercial money solutions to do that, what's interesting about a digital euro? What would the benefits be or what are the different aspects of that brings? I mean all central banks including DCB have explicitly said they will continue issuing bank notes without time limitation, but nevertheless usability of bank notes may at the end disappear because shops no longer want to accept them and most customers also don't want to use them. So in that case people would have to rely fully on digital payments and the payment industry is a network industry in which economies of scale imply that there will be always a high degree of concentration and of market power so the payment market easily ends as an oligopoly or monopoly even and that means that dominant players can set high prices at the end, competition is missing. And here the continuation of available central bank money for usage and payments would mean an outside option for citizens, for customers, which also put a constraint on the potential use of market power by those private companies which easily dominate the payment market. To add one thing in Europe, in addition, we have the issue that the largest players are all foreign companies or subsidiaries are foreign companies and if we look at the trend, they are further expanding market share. And in a certain way, you know, payment is a strategically important economic function. And it's not ideal, maybe, that this is in the hands of a few, you know, foreign subsidiaries or foreign companies. It just adds vulnerability for Europe, which again speaks maybe for maintaining an outside option maintaining a means of payment a universal one for which we have a European monetary sovereignty also as a fallback solution. So it's about adding adding an option it's about not taking it's not taking anything away it's not taking away banknotes it's not taking away these private solutions but it's offering something else and it's a public solution and it's home grown as it were. Exactly, I mean it's not to take away, let's say, the role of the private sector. I think the private sector has offered, you know, again very convenient, impressive electronic payment solutions and the private sector will continue to play a very important role and commercial bank money is there to stay. Okay so going back to my hypothetical visit to the bakery where I'm currently over enthusiastically using my watch. What would it look like with with a digital euro? How would that do? What would I do? Yeah. I mean, already now, you may have different electronic payment solutions, so that you could use in principle there. So then there will be an additional one. And you will decide on the basis of convenience, or whatever comes to your mind, which one you want to use. You know, one reason you might want to use the digital euro could also be privacy. You know, if you don't like the idea that private solutions could use your payment data for, you know, customizing advertisements or whatever, you know, the digital euro would aim at or would guarantee to not use your payment data. But I think you can imagine it, you know, being one payment solution, maybe you will have different payment apps on your mobile, and the digital euro app could be one of them, or it could be even integrated into private payment solutions that you could switch from between commercial bank money and central bank money or that we have still to explore. Okay, very interesting. We've talked about the positive aspects then. Some of the advantages. What if I get super enthusiastic and decide, well, I like the sound of this. Central bank money. I've never heard of a central bank going out of business. Why don't I get rid of my bank account and have all my money in central bank digital currency in a digital euro? Would that work? But I don't think that this would be a good choice really because we don't aim at substituting the private sector with all let's say its service offers and innovative power so my guess would be the private sector will remain you know much broader in its services and more efficient maybe so digital euro should you know provide basic payment functions and there it should be good it should be as convenient as private solutions but I don't think we will offer you know a lot of value-added services that you have with your with your bank account like I don't know possibility to purchase securities or possibility to convert into other currencies or you know regular transfers of money or direct habits I mean to be seen but there's no ambition let's say of central banks in general to to offer all those services because the private sector you know it's a lot of work to offer them. There's a lot of work to be in touch with clients when things go wrong and so on. So we also have the idea to rely on the private sector for the front end and for managing customer relations. So banks have all those customer relations anyway. They do due diligence identifying their customers doing anti-money laundering, counter-terrorist financing. All those things are done by the banking system and it's a huge workload. A lot of people are working on that. So it would be really efficient to recycle this work and maybe to put the front end in the hands of of regulated entities like banks to not replicate everything and that's again an argument in favor of not expecting that the banks will lose business or other payment providers will lose business because it will be very reasonable to rely on them. Okay so so as you say I'm probably still going to need my bank account for all the things I need the bank account for today like making payments transfers receiving my salary that kind of thing paying rent and also it's wide open what the design of the digital euro is and one possible answer is that it's a sort of back-end and banks still provide a front-end. I mean can you talk us through a bit more some of some of the digital euro is and one possible answer is that it's a sort of back end and banks still provide a front end. I mean, can you talk us through a bit more some of the design choices that would have to be made here? Yeah, the back and technical solution is of course a big topic and we have started to think through it. if you read about central bank digital currencies in general people tend to mention two basic approaches one is a central ledger so a central system of accounts in which you would book every transaction and you would record there all the positions of all the holders of digital euro that's's, let's say, the traditional approach. All the private digital payment solutions are in a certain way based on central ledgers. Now, on the other side, what is mentioned often, and often people believe that this comes naturally with central bank digital currency, is a DAT distributed ledger technology which is also what is behind Bitcoin actually in some sense. So there the idea is that it's a decentralized system without a central book and I mean all those things are very fascinating and we are working on them. My personal intuition here is that the traditional central ledger technology and the idea of online-based payments is a more obvious one also for a digital euro because it's way tested. It is used for all the commercial bank payments today. So the necessity to come, you know, also with a major innovation on the technological side is to be seen now. Okay, very interesting. Just to take a wider step back for a second. I mean, where do we sit sort of in international comparison terms? I mean, we're talking about the digital euro here, but what sort of things are happening in other countries and jurisdictions? Yeah, a lot of central banks are looking into CBDC, central bank digital currency, 80% of central banks worldwide are engaged in CBDC work, and also, you know, other big central banks like the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the People's Bank of China, and so on. And the People's Bank of China is actually the most advanced of those large central banks. So it has already deployed, know large scale experimentation so it is soon to be able as I understand to really issue a digital currency for users and the ECB maybe is a bit in the middle field here of central banks and one reason why we are not such a front runner may be that the euro area is still relying heavily on banknotes. There are differences between euro area countries but on average that's a fair statement. And also we have a way functioning banking system so also commercial bank money and private electronic payment solutions are working pretty fine. So from this perspective there was no urgency to now launch this project. In the meantime when you see the trends in electronic payments you come maybe to different conclusions that now it is time to look into this to be prepared to be able to decide at some stage to issue digital euro even if currently still maybe there's no acute need to do so. Okay and so I'm going back to the digital euro then what are the next steps? When will this be ready? That's a big question. That's a big question. Yeah, the, I mean, so far, the ECB has issued its report, as you mentioned, on 2nd of October, it was the first comprehensive official statement, you could say of the ECB, how it sees the topic of a digital euro, but the next step would be likely, you know, to decide to go for a real project, and that could be done maybe mid-off next year. And this decision to go for a project would not be a decision to issue a digital euro, but to really decide to issue and to issue in a few years then we should launch such a project in the meantime we have launched our public consultation that came out on 12th of October it's on our website and we'll definitely link to that in the show notes yeah on that stay open for that's for three months so it goes until 11th of January next year. So there's enough time for everybody to look at it. And it's really addressed not only to academia, the financial sector or public, or sorry, it's really to everyone. So you will find questions that are most suitable, maybe for one group, than for the other. But in principle everybody can you know answer to all questions. We would of course hope for learning about their needs, you know, what value added they would see from a digital euro, what front and solution they would expect, you know, what they find most convenient in currently existing private digital payment solutions so that we can learn how to design this to be really in the interest and be in demand of citizens. Okay, so as long as you're listening to this podcast before the 11th of January 2021, we absolutely would like to hear your views. Ulrich, thank you so much for your time today. It's very interesting and good luck with the input from the consultation and all the work around it. Yeah, thanks Michael. It was a pleasure. That brings us to the end of this episode. So we've heard that while the ECB needs to be prepared for the event that a digital euro is needed, the plans are still at a fairly early stage and no decision has been taken yet. On the contrary, we're actually asking you to give feedback on a possible digital euro in the public consultation that we mentioned. You can search online for digital euro and ECB and as I said we'll put something in the show notes. Thank again Ulrich Binsel for joining the conversation and giving us his insights. Do also look in the show notes for other links to related papers and publications from the ECB. We'd love to hear your feedback and thoughts for future episodes via social media. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Michael Steen. If you like what you've heard, please do subscribe and leave us a review. Until next time, thanks for listening.