 Welcome to the ECB podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Michael Steen and in today's episode we're looking back at the economic response to the coronavirus crisis over the past nine months and ahead to 2021. I'm very happy to say we're joined today with the ECB's chief economist Philip Lane. Philip, welcome back to the podcast. My pleasure Michael. So when we last talked on the podcast in May, we were doing so remotely. I think you were in Dublin and I was at my home somewhere outside Frankfurt. Six months later, we're actually back inside the main building of the ECB, obviously doing this with the right hygiene measures and social distancing and so on. Just that little example shows you that we've learned a little bit about how we live with this virus and that we've adapted our ways of living and working. But how's it been for you? How have you worked through these months? So I mean I think both the ECB and my own personal experience very much mirrors what we've seen more generally. So in the spring and that peer from mid-March really until the end of May we were in a severe situation where we were all by and large working from home. I spent a lot of time in Dublin at that time but in the with the Miracle of Modern Technology you can work remotely for a sustained period and really since then it's been much more of a halfway house between normality and then right now here we are in mid-December with maybe less in the office more working from home and that's been the experience of the ECB. It's been my experience lots of more time away from the head office here but actually this autumn quite a bit of time back in the office and I think you, you know, as you indicated, that's partly, we're learning to live with the virus. You managed in the spring, as the chief economist and the member of the governing council, to take some pretty big decisions and doing all that whilst working with your team at the ECB, with everyone in their houses, I guess, and then the governing council also meeting in this remote format. Do you have any observations or particular things you want to share about how that was? Well I think of the we will all spend time at some point looking back and trying to recall that period with some perspective but I think Marchy policy and maybe the policy word in general. Unfortunately this is not the first crisis and so in many ways the lessons from the previous major crisis to global financial crisis and the European sovereign that crisis did mean we had a lot of experience about how to respond to a crisis but I think we can look back to that period and of course not everything was going to be perfect but I think by and large did the number one job for Central Bank in that severe acute phase of a crisis is to provide stability to stabilise and we did that. So there were those big decisions that the pandemic emergency purchase programme, the cheap funding for banks, the tell tros, and a lot of other measures, also measures by our banking supervisors. You had to, those were sort of born of the crisis in the crisis, and if you look back at the year, how how happy are you about how those have worked and what are your reflections? So I think there were three goals. One was to stabilize and because there was a lot of market dislocation at that time, the immediate priority was to stabilize financial markets. The second, we know quite often there's a credit squeeze. When firms are in trouble, the natural temptation of course is for banks to become more cautious. So we knew we had to offset that instinct that impulse towards tighter credit and that's where the the telters came in the targeted lending program. And then the third is when you have this large shock, now of course at the immediate lockdown you have to accept, I mean if there's a public health emergency you have to accept economic activity is going to fall, but in order to support the recovery to enable the recovery from those declines to be as rapid as possible, that's where general monetary policy support kicks in. And so we needed a monetary policy to be sufficiently accommodative in order for the economy to get through this pandemic period and that remains the challenge. You mentioned already the previous crisis like the the sovereign debt crisis and the great financial crisis and a bit difference here was that it was also hand-in-hand with fiscal policy in some ways. Or can you talk a bit about how the what was the fiscal element here that was so important? Well, I mean, if you go back to the very start of the financial crisis, so in 08-09, there was fiscal support then as well. Later on, when you had the kind of difficulty of deciding how quickly to normalize fiscal policy in 2010, 2011, 2012, as we know in Europe, that caused a lot of problems. But the initial crisis response was directionally similar in 2008, 2009. There was an extra rule for fiscal policy because the pandemic hit sectors very differently. There are some sectors which benefit, so the kind of high-tech sectors which are having us work from home, shop from home, have benefited but that travel, tourism, entertainment, restaurants have been heavily hit. And monetary policy works for the whole economy when we need to have policies that support workers and firms and individual sectors, then that's where fiscal policy needs to take a lead. And we've seen it. We've seen extraordinary fiscal policy this year, and we're going to continue to need extraordinary fiscal policy in the next year or two. We're now recording this sort of in the nearly mid-December. It's just after both another governing council meeting where big decisions were taken, and actually also significant decisions taken in Brussels on more on the fiscal support side. The most recent measures that the ECB took what have we done and why did we see the need to do more I guess? So I think the key word about this is to prolong. So what we've got right now is a second wave. Now we always kind of a new there would be recurrence of the virus to some degree this winter, but it's turned out that actually as we know now here we are in mid-December and across Europe there are restrictions of varying severity, restricting against services, those sectors which rely on social interaction. So as we indicated now we think we have a recession again in these last months of the year. And so what that has essentially meant is the pathway out of the pandemic. We remain very confident and now the news of the vaccine. I think we have a clear vision of the exit from this pandemic. But to form the bridge from now, when we're in recession, when there's many firms losing money again, many workers who are at risk, to form the bridge to the other side, which we think about as spring 2022, essentially, 15, 18 months from now. That's why essentially we've reorganized, we've recalibrated the PEP and the TELLTros to get us to that point. And I think that's what essential bank is for, is to provide stability, to provide that kind of pathway, to allow the economy to get through this, to support the economic recovery, and as you say, hand in hand, to make sure that fiscal policy can obtain the funding needed to provide the fiscal support we need. And in that context, I think it's very important that we did get this agreement at the European Council. The Next Generation EU Fund will essentially be a major driver of economic activity for next five years. That's important. We understand that we have a vision that will help the economy, as they not just get through the immediate crisis, but also has a clear momentum that will help us in the post-pundemic recovery period. Okay, and you mentioned already there was a slightly difficult kind of situation because there's the positive news on the vaccine, but the recession, I mean I think the ECB staff forecasts that there's a 2% contraction in gross domestic product in the fourth quarter. But at the same time you also said the economic impact is less than the first wave. So it's quite a lot of information there, a lot of things to consider. So let me emphasize is that normally when it's stated there's a 2% recession in one quarter, that would be... That is a big number, that is dramatically big number. But because we had a 15% point decline in the first half of this year, of course relative to that it's a much smaller number, but it's still a pretty big dent in the economy. Now again, we do think quarter three this year, July, August, September, it showed that the economy can come back quite quickly. So we are quite confident that there will be a significant recovery in the economy and in the inflation process, but we have such a big decline, I mean I think maybe the better number of think about is the year for the economy right now is about 7 percentage points smaller than a while a year ago. So this is a really big decline. We understand the reasons for it. We are confident as the virus becomes contained, and especially as the vaccines get rolled out, that there will be a good recovery, but it's going to take a while. The vaccine will not instantaneously create the new jobs, create the new demand. And so there's probably a mismatch. So the financial markets can respond immediately to the vaccine news, but we do think the economy will take those 18 months if like we think 2019 GDP will be recovered towards the second half of 22. So you know the story of next year is going to be a major a major program of activity to get the vaccines rolled out and then in the meantime of course the ECP has no nothing special to add in terms of public health advice but in terms of making sure the the financing conditions are there to make sure that there's no interruption to the recovery process that's our job. So we're building this bridge and that it's keeping financing conditions favourable and the way we do that there's two big parts of it aren't there's the pandemic emergency purchases and also the TL to rose we've mentioned both but maybe we should just touch on both briefly. But maybe I just that underneath those two programs because remember maybe it's always the case that the most important policy tool and essential bank has is the short-term interest rate which we have kept at a low level minus 0.5 because that very low level essentially enables and is the platform both for the PEP and for the targeted lending program. The efficient route is not so much to have further cuts in the policy rates right now, but to focus on having the support for the longer-term funding. So when we do these as-of-purchases, where we're buying sovereign bonds, corporate bonds, of different maturities, it provides support for long-term funding, not just short-term funding, and that's very important for those who need to borrow to get through this crisis. And then the targeted lending program provides an incentive relative to the policy rate. And it's very important for that because we know when firms are losing money, we know when the overall economic environment has some clouds in it. Resisting that, countering that to a targeted lending program, we think is quite effective. Now the targeted lending, that works by the ECB giving banks very very cheap access to money to help them lend on. Some people don't like the sound of that. They sort of say, well, why are you giving the banks all this money? to money that to help them lend on. Some people don't like the sound of that. They sort of say, well, why are you giving the banks all this money? Can you explain the rationale? I would try not to use phrases you use, because it's actually not the case we're transferring money to the banks. They borrow the money. They offer collateral. The banks still are taking the risk. They're taking the risk of lending to firms, small firms, lending to micro-enterprises, lending to individual traders. And essentially in a recession, typically the natural instinct for a bank is say, look, there's more risk about it, we need to either lend less or raise our lending rate to allow for a bigger risk premium. And what targeted lending does is essentially fight against that because by providing access to cheaper funding it means that maybe the lending rate can be stabilized rather than going up. And that's essentially how it's working. We look at our tools and it's very clear that one of the dangers to price stability is if this recession were made were made worth by credit decrees. So that's when banks stop lending basically. And you can understand that the spiral you get there, you know, and you know what we're going back to this phrase we're using quite a bit these days about favourable financing conditions. it really should not be taken for granted. we're using quite a bit these days about favorable financing conditions. It really should not be taken for granted. Recessions tend to take on their own dynamic, where does this real finance interaction, which is poor economic prospects make banks pull back, and if banks pull back, more firms are unable to invest or to keep on financing their working capital, which makes the recession deeper. You've already talked a bit about the vaccine and how we're not sure quite what that means but how important it is and obviously that's not our role, but it's a key input into what the economic story of next year will be. But it means also you are actually having to look a lot of health stuff more than normal. I mean in terms of the economic projections these forecasts we make. You and the teams of economists working for you are now delving into understanding this a lot more to try and figure out well what can we say about the about next year? Could you talk about that a little more? The first of me, we give out three scenarios, a baseline and then a kind of a severe scenario. What happens if this pandemic gets worse and a milder scenario? What happens if there's good news arrives earlier? I think that framework has worked very well. Back in May, the team, I think made the correct assessment, is over time we would learn to live with the virus. So the same amount of infections now in terms of the economic hit is less than in the spring because both the health systems have learned how to deal with cases and retail has learned how to offer alternative ways of shopping. We've learned how to reorganize manufacturing factories construction sites to reconcile social distancing, maintaining production. So I think they've done a really good job of being a quantitatively I think a reasonable approach. But let me come back to this basic point is it remains uncertain. That's one of the key words in thinking about next year. And this is why if you like in our policy announcement yesterday we emphasised our flexible approach. And our commitment is essentially to maintain conditions at a favourable level in order to allow the European economy to get out of this situation, this bridge towards the post-pandemic period. And that, I think, is the appropriate way to deal with what we have, which is next year, you know, we think there's going to be a lot of news. We've already got, of course, now, in the UK, the initial people receiving vaccines. That's going to be the story here in the area very quickly. And so we're going to see, we're going to learn a lot next year about how quickly the logistics can work. We're going to learn a lot over time about how much protection these vaccines provide. We may well have to encounter some disappointing news because we think the history of any big project is sometimes is a bump in the road. And again, I think the fundamental philosophy of any central bank is to be a stabilising force, to deal with the good news, to deal with the bad news. Okay, I mean, just quickly, so the bad news, I mean, you've talked already in a speech in November about how young people often are the ones who lose their jobs first. There's also lots of questions on what is the lasting kind of economic damage is the so-called scarring. I mean, do you have any further thoughts on that? I'm pretty sure there will be more scarring, the more we tolerate a deepening of this recession. So we very much are focused from our multi-policity point of view in doing what we can. And of course the lead role is with fiscal policy. So whether that's accelerating imperators that were needed anyway, such as digitalisation and investing for the carbon transition, whether it's providing support for the firms which are perfectly viable, but which are just taking a big revenue hit right now, and also recognizing in some cases there will need to be retraining, reallocation towards those sectors which are look like they're going to grow more quickly and away from those sectors which may have to have a longer-term adjustment. Okay and then you're hinting there that there's just some seeds of hope in that right because there's also positive things that can come out of this. There's a little bit of serendipity because of course changes in how we we live and how we work creates new opportunities and we see that everywhere that that businesses are responding. So so it's partly that that is just the serendipity of how the world adapts, but partly it's conscious. It's conscious in the sense of right now, when there's a lot of spare capacity, it's very good timing for governments to step forward, to accelerate public investment investment and through the various support schemes also support those firms which have a financial problem but in terms of their economic contribution can make a very good economic contribution post-pandemic. Okay before we let you go so final question you've talked a lot about how we're building this bridge, we're trying to maintain favourable financing conditions and how busy that's going to be actually for next year. Do you have any other big issues on your agenda for 2021? Well Michael, I mean, you may have noticed that we've also been quite busy, but maybe in a quiet way with the Monte- Policy Strategy review. Yes, we are doing public events, we we're listening and I think that's been very interesting this autumn to listen to different groups but it's a huge internal project for the ECB for the National Central Bank for sure 2021 is going to be busy not just with whatever's happening in the world but with also trying to bring this strategy review to a successful conclusion. And in a sentence, how do you define the stretch, you're a few? What's the aim there? Well the aim is really, I mean, as you know, it's been essentially 18 years, since the last one, is to, one level to validate or to cross-check, are we on the right past? It's always good to test yourself and look at benchmarks and so on. But also we know the world has changed. We know the world has changed in terms of digitalization, climate change, demography. We are in the world where we know there's a lot of forces pushing down interest rates, real forces if you like, and how a central bank can operate or should operate in that world, it is super important. We're learning a lot, we know a lot, but in the end we have to draw conclusions. And that's really going to be the big project for this year, is to bring all that together and formulate a strategy that will bring us into the coming years. Okay, Philip, it sounds like it's going to be a very busy 2021, so I want to wish you a relaxing Christmas with your family in Dublin and see you in January. Thank you, Michael, and thank you to you and all your colleagues also. Okay, this brings us to the end of this episode. We've seen how since the coronavirus crisis hit Europe, there's been great progress to support the economy and paved for an economic recovery. Policymakers have acted decisively to mitigate the impact of the virus on the economy and support all European citizens. But as we just heard from Philip, uncertainty prevails. So the coronavirus is going to keep everyone busy for some months to come, even with the good news on the vaccination. We'd love to hear your feedback and thoughts for future episodes for our social media. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Michael Steen. If you like what you've heard, please do subscribe and leave us a review. Until next time, thanks for listening.