 The financial stability outlook in the euro area remains fragile. Higher interest rates and weaker economy prospects are putting pressure on borrowers, especially in real estate markets. Are there reasons to worry? We've just released our latest financial stability review, which twice a year takes stock of the potential risks to financial stability in the euro area. Today we'll talk about whether the financial system is stable and take a closer look at the emerging risks, especially in property markets. You're listening to the ECB podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Stefania Secula. I'm joined by John Fell, who works in our Financial Stability Department and is a regular guest here on the ECB podcast. Nice to have you here again John. Thank you Stephanie. John, let's start from taking a look at what has changed in the six months since you last talked on our podcast. Back then financial markets were shaken after bank failures in the US and Switzerland. Today key interest rates are record levels. This is helping to bring down inflation, which is very welcome development. There are two sides to this coin, though, and some worry about sluggish economic prospects. How are financial markets responding to this environment? Well, first off, financial markets quickly shook off the shock that was triggered by the US and Swiss bank failures that you mentioned. While there were expectations that those stresses might have led to an earlier end to the monetary policy, tightening cycle in order to safeguard financial stability, the avoidance of contagion and spillover saw those expectations quickly dissipating. And despite some turbulence in 81 markets, euro area banks largely weathered the storm. So resilience was tested and once again after the stress is caused by the pandemic and the war in Ukraine, I think we can say that it was proven. And since then, broadly speaking, market sentiment has gone through two phases. First there was a period of excessive optimism about prospects for a soft landing of the global economy, and so that's the soft landing narrative is one whereby disinflation would proceed sufficiently rapidly that it would allow central banks to make an early so-called so-called pivot to that start to reduce interest rates and avoid recession. And this widespread optimism seemingly acted as a kind of a counterbalance to the tightening of monetary policy. Now we considered this market narrative to be overly optimistic and we thought that it was setting markets up for disappointment and then when US inflation started picking up again and with euro area inflation coming down a bit more slowly than we might have hoped the narrative started to change and market conviction about a soft landing faded somewhat and with that capitulation the more adverse higher for longer scenario gained traction and it resulted in a route in the bond market and the US stock market briefly re-entered correction territory. But since then the consensus has changed again and it seems safe to say that uncertainty is high and it has been rising and of course certain uncertainties have also been compounded by the flare-up of geopolitical tensions in the Middle East. Okay yeah yeah and indeed let's look at the geopolitical situation. There are several conflicts going on and indeed let's look at the geopolitical situation. There are several conflicts going on and it's a human tragedy. My heart goes out to all the victims. From a financial stability perspective, what do the war in Ukraine and the conflict in the Middle East mean? Well, I think we've all seen how these geopolitical conflicts have entailed dreadful humanitarian suffering, including the deaths of innocent people, the displacement of people from their homes, and of course refugee crisis as well. Both events impacted energy markets adversely as well, although this was much more so the case following the invasion of Ukraine because of the sanctions on Russia, supply disruptions, and shifts in energy trade patterns, as many European countries work to reduce their reliance on Russian gas. Now whenever geopolitical tensions escalate in the Middle East, it's a relatively safe bet that oil prices will rise. And that's because it's a major oil-producing region and oil markets tend to be highly sensitive to events that could cause supply disruptions. Even perceptions can be enough and so oil prices did actually rise briefly during the first couple of weeks after October the 7th when Israel was attacked. But with concerns easing about the likelihood that an oil producing country would become involved they've since fallen back. Now you asked what does it all mean for financial stability? Yeah. Well so geopolitical risk can affect financial stability in several ways through economic channels, through financial ones, and then simply by creating uncertainty. So if energy markets are affected the economy would be confronted with the so-called supply-side shock. So that's where production capacity has affected negatively causing prices to rise. And we saw that with the surge of inflation after the invasion of Ukraine. Now that required a response from monetary policy to bring inflation down. Now with views, with market views somewhat torn between a soft landing outcome and interest rate staying higher for longer any geopolitical tensions which could push inflation higher Would make the higher for longer scenario more likely and at the same time then the uncertainty part Investors often react to uncertainty by moving their assets to safer havens. That can lead to capital flight from from riskier investments for instance in the EFSO we show a lot of evidence that market pricing is underestimating the risks that lie ahead. So if shifts like that were to occur in response to a geopolitical event, it could destabilize financial asset prices. I see. Let's talk about banks now. Because here in Europe, they've been quite strong lately. High interest rates have pushed their profits to a multi-year high. Let's talk about banks now and because here in Europe they've been quite strong lately. High interest rates have pushed their profits to a multi-year high. However, as you point out in the Financial Stability Review, their valuations have not responded to the improvement in bank fundamentals and profitability. Why? What's the actual health condition of Euroera banks? So, I mean, if we look back to late 2008, so that in 2019, in 2019, sorry, What's the actual health condition of Euro-A-R-R-R-R-R-R-R-R-R-R-R-R-R-I-L-L-O-B-L-B-L-Bing-Bing-L-Bank profitability in the Euro-O-R-O-R-A-L-B profitability in the Euro-to- Euro-E-L-A-L-A-L-A-L-E-S-E-L-L-E-S-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E-E- from strength to strength. The reasons are, I think, relatively well known, average funding costs have risen much more slowly than the returns that banks have been able to earn on their assets. So that has boosted net interest income margins. And then with margins increasing, more in countries where loans are contracted mostly on floating terms. And where so-called deposit betas have been low. Can you repeat that? deposit? deposit betas. So as a a side I sometimes think it might be easier to understand them if these betas were called retas. So the realized interest transmission effect or how much of the official rate change is passed through to deposit rates. But as you said, we do have something of a conundrum. When we look at bank share price developments compared to bank profitability developments, profitability has on average doubled from the pre-pandemic levels that was giving rise to those financial stability concerns. But price book ratios, that's one of the most common metrics evaluation for banks have hardly changed and price earnings ratios even fell so what's going on well for one the cost of equity has risen and it's risen by about as much as the return on equity has now that's partly due of course to the fact that interest rates are higher, risk rate rates are higher. And that raises required returns across the board regardless of what kind of business. You're talking about it. But the conundrum is why has improved profitability? So that's a source of organic growth and bank capital. Banks can grow their capital if they are profitable. Yes. And that should make them less risky. but it hasn't actually lowered their so-called equity risk premium. Now we offer some answers to this conundrum in box five of the FASOR. The main one being that neither bank analysts, nor investors expect that this year's bumper profits are going to last. And they're projecting lower profits next year. So revenues are set to decline because loan demand is expected to remain weak and the cost of credit risk. So that's the cost of loan impairment. So if borrowers default on their loans, and those costs are rising. And then added to that, now this really depends on how the economy performs in the future. But we're expecting funding costs to rise over time as competition among banks for deposits becomes more intense, causing that Rita to rise. Now all of this is to say that investors are not convinced that euro area banks offer so called value opportunities. So their valuation ratios are low that might seemingly make them attractive for investors. But it can't really be excluded that low-bank profitability is going to make a comeback as a financial stability concern going forward. Now the reason for that is the legacy of low for long. We had this period of very low interest rates for a long time. And as a result of it, many banks have been left holding low yielding assets with long maturities. So think about mortgages that are, you know, 20 or more years in maturity and have very low interest rates. Now we also show on box five that so-called windfall taxes can raise the return that investors require for holding bank equity. So in addition to reducing the resilience of the banks at a time when they are likely to be facing increasing challenges, taxes like that make it actually more expensive for banks to raise equity in the market, and that's not positive for financial stability. I see. I see. It clarifies now. And another point is in the report is the description of real estate markets as a source of concern for financial stability at this moment. High interest rates are squeezing borrowers. If somebody wants to buy a house today, they may think twice or think of people who took variable rate mortgages or again households which have to renegotiate their terms now. So for individuals, this is very tough. But what does it mean for banks and ultimately for financial stability? Yeah, so the impact of rising interest rates on borrowers indeed does, as you said, definitely depend very much on whether the financing is contracted at variable rates or if the term of the loan is short, and whether it must be refinanced within new loans. So borrowers with contracts like these, they feel the pinch of higher interest, higher mortgage payments sooner than those who have taken out loans at fixed rates for longer terms. So in the euro area mortgage lending terms, when we look across countries, are rather heterogeneous. Around two-fifths of mortgages have rates that are fixed for more than ten years. And more than half have fixation periods of five years or longer. So for those that have some years to go before the fixation period comes to an end they actually won't have noticed any change in their payments yet but those on unvariable rates are are at the end of their fixation period, the ones that you were speaking up, they will be in a worse position of course. Now for financial stability an important feature of lending practices in Europe is that non-recourse mortgages. So those are mortgages where the lenders only recourse in case of a default is to repossess the mortgage property and then has no further claim against the borrower. Those kinds of mortgages are not very common. I mean we saw problems with those kinds of mortgages in the US in 2008. This means that households who have seen the values of their house fall, they can't simply hand the keys back to the bank without expecting consequences. And if they're facing challenges in making higher mortgage payments, they're more likely to run down their savings, are to cut back on consumption, say, luxuries, before defaulting on their mortgages. Now, budget arithmetic for a household will change, of course, when faced with unemployment. Yes. Now that is when we would expect to see default rising and where we might see some financial stability problems. Now we don't see any concrete science of the labor market turning yet, but we have seen, we have been seeing unemployment slowly rising in some countries, and of course a sharper rise would obviously be a downside risk. So what about commercial properties, John? Now indeed, we have a bit more concern here about the commercial real estate market. And here one could say that this time really is different. And it really is different because the normal cyclical downturn is being amplified by structural challenges affecting in particular the retail and the office segments of the commercial property market. So a report published by the EU Commission earlier this year shows that the the proportion of e-shopers in Europe grew from 55% in 2012 to 75% in 2022 and that of course was no doubt spurred by the pandemic, people doing more of their retail shopping online. And that has taken away, that has taken business away from the high street shops, and of course, and has an impact on their values. Also working from home, on the positive site, it minimized disruption in many service sectors during the pandemic, but now we have a legacy of the remote working has been retained. Higher vacant, that means that you get higher vacancy rates in office buildings, which reduces the value of those buildings, and then with higher interest rates we're seeing leveraged property company owners facing challenges in refinancing their existing debt. Now ultimately this can lead to an increase of loan defaults and foreclosures and we've seen we've been seeing a bit of this already and it puts downward pressure on the prices then that sellers can get for those properties. Now the question is, does this pose a systemic risk? And we try in a special feature in the FSR to answer that question. And the answer is that a commercial property crisis would not be enough on its own to cause widespread capital depletion in the banking system. The reason for that is that bank exposures, while they are material, they're simply not large enough to cause widespread problems. But a decline in real estate markets, of course, can spill over to other sectors. So for example, construction companies, real estate agencies and other businesses, can suffer. And that could lead to job losses and reduced economic activity. And then additionally a decline in commercial property values, don't forget there are investors in those properties, there's an impact on the rental incomes for investors and that affects their financial health and their ability to invest in other areas. So it is not, the commercial property market is not an island so to speak. Yes, they are not isolated indeed. and and on balance I mean what you just described as the situation that looks rather gloomy. Do you see any reasons for optimism? So the financial cycle has unmistakably turned and the severity of the contraction we think is going to depend on whether we get a soft landing or a harder one. Now a particular challenge that we are confronted with at this juncture is that we have several vulnerabilities unraveling simultaneously, so housing and commercial real estate and others. Now that may seem gloomy, but I always say a financial stability assessment is not complete without an evaluation of resilience. And here we can derive, I think, a measure of reassurance. It was not always the case that the Yin balanced the Yang, certainly not before the global financial crisis, but our view is that the deliberate efforts taken since then to fortify capital and liquidity buffers within the banking system have positioned it well to face these higher risks. So the EBA carried out a stress test of European banks this summer and despite a scenario that had severe negative shocks, including a global recession, higher unemployment, and increased interest rates and credit spread. So everything going wrong, simultaneously, European banks remained resilient in that stress test. And the reason for this positive outcome was that the average fully loaded common equity tier one capital ratio, so that's the important ratio uh... for regulators uh... at the start of the exercise that was fifteen percent uh... and it allowed banks to withstand capital depletion and still meet regulatory requirements at the end of the exercise now that's not to say that there's any room for a complacency uh... that's why we're we're advocating in this issue of the FSR for targeted macro potential policy intervention from where needed. So in real estate markets for example with the aim of safeguarding the enduring strength of this resilience through the challenging times that we think lie ahead. So gloomy picture, the safeguards in place are stronger than before, but it's not time for complacency. This is in a nutshell, the message. Thanks, John. So, it's good to end on a more positive note. Before we wrap up, we always have a question for our guests. And that's for a hot tip on today's topic. So, real estate markets and financial stability. John, what's your hot tip today? So actually, as we started with geopolitical risks and it has been a recurring team of these podcasts on financial stability since we started them, I thought I would actually make a recommendation for what I view as a valuable and independent source for gaining a deeper understanding of geopolitics. And that is the YouTube channel of Johnny Harris. An Emmy award-winning journalist and filmmaker, Harris has an exceptional talent, I think, for breaking down complex global geopolitical issues into digestible and engaging content. He has a unique storytelling style which he combines with really stunning visuals often based on maps. It's clearly involving in-depth research and his explanations of current, our historical events are really I think easy to understand and concise. And I think it's no wonder that his videos routinely reach millions within days of being uploaded. Wow. So Johnny Harris style. Very good. Thank you, John. Sounds very interesting. And this brings us to the end of this episode. I want to thank John Fell, Deputy Director General for Macroprudential Policy and Financial Stability at ECB. Thank you, John. Thank you, Stefania. Dear listeners, check out the show notes for more on this topic. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Stefania Secola. If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review. In the spirit of Europe, today I'd like to end in French and say, Abiento. Until next time, thanks for listening.