 If I asked you how the ECB's monetary policy decisions reach the economy, you might well say through banks. And you'd mostly be right. Banks are indeed one of the main channels through which our monetary policy is passed onto the economy. Plus, it's where many people, like you and me, feel the changes to monetary policy through the rates for Loans and Savings. Welcome to the ECB podcast Summer School, helping you understand what's going on in the economy and central banking. My name is Katie Ranger. Banks aren't doing all the work when it comes to what we call monetary policy transmission. Financial markets are key players, and some funds and insurers are also becoming more important as providers of loans and financial services. key players and some funds and insurers are also becoming more important as providers of loans and financial services. But here in the euro area banks play a particularly important role. That's because our capital markets are less developed than in say the US, meaning that those looking for funding are much more likely to turn to banks to find it. Explaining today's topic for us is ECB Chief Economist and Professor Philip R. Lane. Good to see you again Philip for the last episode of our Summer School mini-series. It's my pleasure to be here. Now we want to zoom in on exactly how banks pass on our monetary policy decisions to you. to me and to the rest of the economy. And the important role that they play in helping us to get inflation back down to our target of 2%. So Philip, how exactly does it work? How do banks pass on the changes to our key interest rates? So that's a many-layered question. So let me tackle it in a couple of ways. Number one, I think everyone listening understands that they do not have a direct relationship with the ECB. If you as an individual knock on our door, we're not going to open up at the past of the account, and we're not going to offer you alone. So as you say, most firms and households in Europe primarily rely on their bank if they want to save or to borrow. You raise deep questions about the role of the wider financial system, whether it's insurance companies, pension funds, mutual funds, or the type of market activity, which has grown in Europe but remains roughly limited compared to the US. Okay, so let's take the case where a firm or an individual really has mostly the option if they want to save or to borrow to go to their bank. So then the big question is how do banks determine what is the interest rate they're going to charge and a loan and then equally what is the interest rate they're going to offer on a deposit? And then let me trace that back to us at the ECB. So at the ECB, when we raise interest rates, we are basically raising the rates which banks can deposit money with us or lend money from us. So the ECB is a central bank and it's called a central bank because our customers are banks, our counterparties are our banks. So if we take the deposit rate, the rate at which they can receive income on a deposit with us, when we raise the deposit rate, if you like, it means that it puts a floor on the rates more generally in the economy because a bank, if you like, always has the choice. Well, if I cannot earn more on a loan to a firm, I can always put money on the positive ECB. So it puts a floor on the rate at which it will lend to to to a firm or a household and that floor is very important. Now you might say why can't they just charge me the exact same rate that they receive from the ECB? I've always wanted that. And the basic answer is twofold. One is a cost run a bank. They need to add a kind of margin for running costs. So whether that's the technology to fund the apps we all use these days, whether it's the cost of running a branch network, the cost of regulation, because we do that to fight terrorism and money laundering banks also have to spend a lot of money on what's called know your customer so all of the regulatory elements from that so that there's a lot of administration there. So one element is there's a going to be basically an administration cost extra amount added on top and then there's also going to be a risk factor because it's not the case, Efron pays back their bank loan. Firms sometimes fail. Sometimes individuals get into a problematic situation and don't pay back their mortgage. So banks have to add in a risk margin as well. So the rate facing you when you walk in add a risk margin as well. So the rate facing you when you walk into a bank or you phone up or you do an online chat it's going to be a mix of the costs coming from us in terms of you like the wholesale cost of finance and then all of these margins. Let me emphasize also is in terms of the the overall cost to a bank of making it on to you, partly they can borrow from us. And but you know, they also rely on on deposits from customers and then also they have to offer depositors. It depends on the bond market rate and these other sources of funding. So this is why it's not straightforward to see the connection between the ECB rate and the rate offered on bank loans. But this has been a long-running topic. Okay, so many of us have indeed seen banks pass on higher interest rates quickly when it came to making loans more expensive, but not so quickly for the interest we receive on our savings. So what have we seen? Have banks passed on our key interest rate changes this last year? So we know quite a bit about history. And what we see now is basically in line with historical evidence. What's happened? They've raised their lending rates quite a bit, you know, quite sharply. And in terms of the rates they offer in deposits, let me make a very sharp distinction between two types of deposits. One is, if you like the, what we call the overnight rate, so everyone has a, who has a bank account, will have a current account, this is the rate at which the account in which you'd eat debit money on your debit card or you add money from your paycheck, whatever. On those overnight accounts, very little interest is offered. But that's always true because essentially that this is a people have these accounts not necessarily to save money, but just to run their life, all the transactions. Now when interest rates were super low, maybe people did use these overnight accounts just also to save because what else were they going to do? So what's happened now is essentially banks have raised the depository quite a bit in what's called a time deposits. If you agree to commit your money for a year, for six months, for two years, for five years, then the interest rate on those deposits, it didn't happen immediately, but over time these have gone up and they're not too far away on average to the ECB race. So this is where you park your money essentially for a certain amount of time and you get a higher rate than if you're just leaving it in your savings account and have access to it all the time essentially. Exactly. So this is if you like a return to some normal pattern. If you go back to the 1990s when I was a student, you know, I do recall at that point, people would were to make the effort because they say why would I leave money in my current account when I can get some interest in my, if you like, a saving account. And people have essentially over last year have re-learned this, at least those who have enough money where it makes a difference. So this is where I think it is happening, it's not happening to the same degree across all of the European countries because clearly banks will raise the deposit rates more quickly if they face competitive pressure and also if they're in an economy where there's a big demand for loans so that they want to raise funding in order to provide to provide credit. So in those European economies where there's a big demand for loans so that they want to raise funding in order to provide credit. So in those European economies in the economy where there's a big demand for loans, so that they want to raise funding in order to provide credit. So in those European economies where there's less demand for loans or where there's less competition it's happened less, but the basic economics is it takes time but eventually banks will raise their lending rate which happened quite quickly and will raise their deposit rates. But let me emphasize mostly only on those time deposits where the customer does not have, if you like, instant access. You do have to accept that the, you can't have it both ways. If you want instant access, you're not going to earn much if any interest. If you are know you have the the kind of a flexibility to put some of your money away for for you know a year, two years or whatever, then you are starting to see visible interest rates again. Let's zoom out to look at how banks affect the economy. in particular what we banks affect the economy. In particular, what we call the real economy. So this is the part that produces goods and services, so big manufacturers, but also the bakery around the corner, or my hairdresser. The real economy is crucial to the euro area's economic activity and growth. So how has the behaviour of banks during our interest rate hikes affected the real economy? What have we seen there? So again, we're one year into this hiking cycle. What we've seen is essentially the the level of lending has really come down quite quickly. And that's a mix of two factors. One with high interest rates firms and houses are less interested in taking a loan. So so one way it operates is that loan demand is lower and the other way it operates is loan supply. And it goes back to what we talked about earlier on. is bags become more cautious if they see that essentially risk has gone up because we're high interest rates and with a slowing economy the probability of a firmer household running into trouble. It doesn't you know dramatically shoot up but it nudges up. So they are going to be more careful saying, well, I don't want to make too many loans because some of these loans may turn bad. So we see all of that. OK, where does this matter? I think one issue where we would be tracking quite carefully is investment. So firms may be tempted to say, well, you know, this year I'm not going to invest for the future because it's too expensive. And then over time, if there's a lack of investment, it reduces the growth capability of the economy. So in the near term, it means less demand for for investment goods. So many firms in Europe are there to support investment. They're making capital goods, that they're advising architects, you know, project managers. There's many people whose job it is to support investment. So less investment, you're going to see it. I think we're seeing it also in basic consumption is is flat. Consumption is not growing even though incomes are growing. So these are things like people buying fringes or... Right, yeah, so I I think there's a hierarchy, it's less activity in the housing market and then it has the knock-on effects. If there's fewer houses being sold then a fewer people who are visiting furniture shops, you know, washing machines, all of that. So we do think that that's quite visible right now. Let me emphasize whoever, and this is so important to appreciate, as we do think there's a very fundamental reason why this process is working, but in a roughly stable manner, because another byproduct of the pandemic was that people did have a period when they were consuming very little. So they did save more than normal. And these pandemic savings allowed them to reduce their debt, allow them to maybe build up a nest egg, for example, a mutual fund or something like that. So it does mean if a hassle gets into trouble, they maybe have more buffers, and they don't necessarily get into a bad loan situation so quickly. Also for firms, I mean for firms that differs quite a bit across sectors, but many firms were were supported by their governments during the pandemic. And then more recently many firms as we talked about in another episode have been making good profits. So there's also if you you like, the kind of, what we think is this will help reduce the amount, help cool inflation, but will not produce the kind of deep recession we had in Europe 15 years ago. And so this is, I think, very important distinction, because people are very nervous when they hear kind of phrases about tightening, kind of a depressing demand, dampening demand. And what we're trying to do is that do enough that we do make sure inflation comes back to target, but we don't see the conditions right now because you usually need this kind of toxic mix where firms are already weak customers are already weak but but you know I think many people are in okay shape so they will respond to high interest rates by reducing demand but we don't think it'll lead into this kind of vortex that leads to a deeper session. If we look specifically at economic activity you just mentioned that we're not looking to have a recession here in Europe. The economy is however weak right now and it is expected to recover but only kind of over time. Do you see that as an issue? What does it mean if activity stagnates? I mean not a recession but it stagnates. Well let's not overly focus on the issue, the technical issue of recession because I think we've always said for months now, that whether the economy is a little bit above zero or a little bit below zero is not the fundamental issue. What I talked about is what's very damaging is a deep and sustained recession. So we don't see that. And what we do see is compared to where we were last year, there's a lot of reasons to believe the European economy will grow over the next couple of years. One basically is it remains the case. There's still a recovery from the pandemic. There's a bounce back. We're well below the level of the economy we might have expected if the pandemic had not happened. And if you like that kind of a trend line, we would expect to reemerge over time. We would expect energy price has been a lot lower now. That's not fully been arrived in people's utility bills, yes, but over time lower energy bills will help. And now we are seeing that wages go up. So as wages go up, the kind of very difficult situation at the end of last year where inflation was sky high, and yet wages were had not gone up, over time households should be in a better financial position. So there are a number of reasons to believe that the European economy will grow over the next couple of years. And the trick for us is basically to make sure demand does not add on supply. So it's not a question of having a driving demand deeply negative, it just has to grow more slowly than supply. Okay, well as you know Philip we we always ask our guests to share a tip, maybe a book, a film, a story with our listeners on the topic that we've been talking about today. So, what would you have to share with our listeners today? So let with our listeners on the topic that we've been talking about today, so banks. What would you have to share with our listeners today? So let me advertise work by some of our colleagues at the Bank of England. So I think there's a very nice book, which is, I think, should be of interest to many people. And the title of the book is called Can't We Just Print More Money? Economics and Ten Simple Questions by Rupal Patel and Jack Meaning. And this book I think is a fantastic explainer of many of the concepts we've been talking about. I can only agree it's a fantastic book and I really recommend that everyone reads it as you do. Well that brings us to the end of this episode. I want to thank ECB Chief Economist Philip Arlene for taking us through the role banks have in passing on our monetary policy and for being our guest on these three summer school episodes. If you found them useful, please subscribe and leave us a review. And be sure to check out the show notes for more on this topic. You've been listening to the ECB podcast Summer School with Katie Ranger. This is my last episode before I hand over the mic for a little while. So today I'm signing off with an especially big, thanks for listening.