 We're in Sintra, Portugal for this year's ECB forum on central banking. It's our biggest event of the year where central bankers, academics and financial market participants from across the world meet to discuss policy issues and the world economy. This year's theme is monetary policy in an era of transformation. And one factor with enormous potential to transform our economies, for better or worse, is geopolitics. Right now, geopolitical risk is higher than we've known for a long time with diplomatic tensions turning into military conflicts, including in Europe. And while most news is rightly focused on the tragedies the war brings to ordinary people, the current risks are also highly relevant to economic policy makers, such as central bankers. You're listening to the ECB podcast bringing insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Paul Gordon and I'm joined by Moritz Schularek who is president of the Kiel Institute for the World Economy. Moritz. Moritz, welcome to Cintra. Thanks for having a minute Paul. Now as I note, recent years have highlighted a lot of the issues that are going on in the world, that are having geopolitical impact on the economy. Here in Europe, obviously Russia's unjustified invasion of Ukraine, the consequences this has had for the EU area, been felt by many ordinary people at least indirectly. Let's start with the broad geopolitical landscape. How do you see it at the moment? Well the world economy really has changed. We are no longer in that belief that globalization is both a force for efficiency and peace and stability. We have a globalized integrated economy but there's certainly tensions and and conflicts are back. The world isn't more stable than it used to be. On the contrary, we've seen rising tensions, both the rivalry between the US and China, and also, you mentioned it, Paul, the Russian invasion of Ukraine. So a war is back in Europe and we're thinking hard researchers policymakers about the economic tools and ways we have to navigate this new landscape. I mean you've also got the Middle East conflict there Gaza but also the West Bank. The impact is still being felt at least indirectly for including URA air assistance. Subscribe a little bit about that, how that how that works. You've conducted research called the Price of War and for listeners who are interested in that there are more in the show notes. So how do geopolitical shocks affect other economies? Right, if you look if you look at wars which are realization really of the geopolitical tension and risk, this is when things go bad when it's... affect other economies? Right, if you look if you look at wars which are realization really of geopolitical tension and risk this is when things go bad when it's too late, then you you can ask yourself who really bears the cost of these wars and first and foremost that's what our research shows it's obviously the the country where the fighting takes place and how we're currently in Ukraine, the Ukrainians are really the Ukrainian economy is bearing most of the cost and historically if you look at major conflicts, interstate wars, GDP, that you know, the amount of goods and services produced, strings by up to 30% during a war. But the interesting finding that we have, and I think that's very relevant for your listeners and for what's going on in the Eurozone and for policymakers as well, is that wars also, if you will, tax other countries that are nothing to do with the war. There are neutral third countries that are, you know, bystanders in the sense that these economic shock, the, you know, the decline and output in the, on the war side spills over, especially into neighbouring countries, and leads to lower economic growth and higher inflation. And we see that quite clearly, for example, in the data for the Eurozone or the Euro area, I should say, and then the EU as a whole, that after the Russia that quite clearly, for example, in the data for the Eurozone, or the Euro area, I should say, and then the EU as a whole, that after the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the year following the invasion, inflation rates, for example, were particularly high in the countries being close to Ukraine and much lower in countries being far away. And that's a general pattern that we find that neighbors really bear the cost of these wars as well. This is an important point and it came up in your panel discussion as well. The biggest impact on the economy is where the fighting is taking place. So in the case of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, whereas Russia's economy has suffered or initially suffered from sanctions, that's not where the fighting is, not in Russia, and the economy is not fair so badly, correct? That's correct. Although I think we have to give it time with there is sanctions on the Russian economy, and these sanctions are working, but they're not working overnight. They are, you know, they're opposing costs, and various things have become much more expensive and much more difficult to produce for the Russian economy and making it harder for the regime and the Kremlin to support the war effort. At the same time, and that's also a lesson from history, that you can sustain these sort of military-fueled booms for a while. You just, you know, you dig up the iron ore, you smell it into steel and make it into steel and produce weapons. That will fuel the economy for a while. Obviously the population suffers and consumption is way down and all of your resources go into this war machine. So it can't be sustained forever, but I'm not so surprised that the Russian economy hasn't collapsed. It's really, and it's a fact, also, if you think about the, after the end of this war, if you think about reparations, if you think about the costs and how to pay for them, it's a fact that really Ukraine and also some neighboring countries, including those in the Eurozone have paid the price for that aggression. And then action is required in some cases by central banks. This is partly about, isn't it, how long the shock lasts because supply shocks central banks would normally look through, but we saw a big jump in energy prices here in the Eurozone and ultimately headline inflation inflation which required action. Right so it's it puts central banks in an uncomfortable position because these spillovers from armed conflict from from wars are negative supply shocks meaning that they lower GDP they lower growth and they push up inflation so there is an uncomfortable choice that central banks have to make between tolerating higher inflation or stabilizing growth and accepting lower growth. And according to our research, and that's, you know, this is general patterns and then from past conflict, these war shocks typically, they're not permanent. Economies bounce back when there's peace and, you know, when reconstruction gets going. But they last a few years, so they last longer than what central banks would typically be comfortable with and sort of looking through a shock. So you can, and to some extent I guess central banks also should respond to these negative, these adverse shocks with monetary policy because they have a chance to influence the economy. So in our research, for example, these shocks last four or five years, so that's a time frame where Central Banks can respond. Coming back to this link between the impact of the geopolitical shock and the distance, if you like. I mean, for some countries, the furthest ones away, they can even benefit correctly. Yeah, that's a, that was a, it's a surprising result for us as well. So I think it's quite intuitive once you start thinking about it. So obviously neighbouring countries, and we know that from the trade literature, trade much more with each other. There's more similar, the transport, the transport routes are well established, as well as it's, it's, it's, it's closer, it's closer, it's closer, it's closer, you can, you can, you can, you can, you can, you can, you can, you each other. There's more similar, the transport, you know, the transport routes are well established. It's closer. You can see that really the amount of trade between two countries shrinks, the further they are part. And now what happens when there's a war that the countries that are most hit immediately by the disruption of trade, by the destruction of capital and infrastructure, also the lower productivity in the war's economy. Imagine you have people can't do their regular jobs anymore, they have to go and fight. So that is necessary and they have to do that, but they're not productive in the same way as they were before. So that shock that comes from the war side gets first and foremost transmitted to the neighbouring countries because they trade a lot with each other. And then the further you go away that a verse supply shock kind of decreases and eventually actually can turn positive because the trade that doesn't happen anymore between the neighbours then gets rerouted. And I think we've seen this if you take the example of the Russian gas that as part of that conflict was cut off and so European producers had to find different supplies and very often they turned to to the United States and to American liquefered natural gas so and then in that sense you can probably argue that for the US economy being far away from the fighting trading very little with Ukraine but then being the country that European producers turned to for additional gas was actually had has gained from that conflict. Yeah, it's extraordinary when you think about it. We talked a little bit about how central banks have to tackle the fallout here. Governments also need to think about it as well in terms of their economic resilience, if you like. And this is something that you've talked about on the panel and you've mentioned in your research. What kind of resilience, what kind of measures do countries have to take? That really connects to what we talked about earlier, that we are now thinking very differently about globalization. So if you look back at the motifs behind the globalization process, there were two promises. One was economic efficiency and growth, and I think globalization has fulfilled that. And there was a second promise, which was like if we trade more with each other, if our economies become more integrated, the world becomes more peaceful and more stable place. And that second promise, to be honest, I think we have to confront the facts that the world isn't that much more stable and that much more peaceful than it used to be. So if trade integration doesn't necessarily pacify international relations, then you want to make sure that you don't become too dependent in certain critical industries and certain raw materials, but also think about pharmaceuticals, antibiotics, in areas that really matter to your economy or to your population, that you don't want to become too dependent on, call it countries that are not in your inner circle of friends. And that raises a whole agenda of economic security, of resilience, of being able to cope with being cut off from certain supplies, and maybe replacing certain trade inputs with domestic production. That's the idea of you know doing industrial policy in certain areas. There could be chips where we many countries are doing this now because they don't want to be dependent too much on one supplier. That could be could be at risk of being changing. It's its its ability to supply these these trips on time etc. So we really now think about the results of deep trade links not only as a positive in terms of efficiency but also as a potential risk in terms of dependencies and uh choke points and ways that foreign powers could exploit their control over certain supply chains and that is a big change in thinking about globalization. I mean it's never going to be easy and obviously you're not suggesting it is you can build a chip factory. It's very expensive, it takes a long time, but you can do it. But rare earths materials for, are mostly in one location. It's China. Fossil fuels maybe can be replaced over time by more renewables, but again, not easy, not cheap. I mean, it's quite a challenge, correct? Particularly on the commodity side. It is in various ways. Number one is that some deposits that we have explored are in places of the world, where, you know, as you know, as you know, as you said, as you said, in various ways. Number one is that some deposits that we have explored are in places of the world where, as you said, we have potential geopolitical rivals, or there might also be locations that are not very secure, and with their civil wars, and where it's not easy for us, and not reliable possible for us to us to say have access to the theomorphite and all these things that we need for the climate transition and the electric vehicles and all of that. The other the other problem is that the not just the deposits but the production and the refinement and the processing of these raw materials tends to be, let's face it, quite dirty. And neither Europe nor the United States, Canada or New Zealand or any of these countries are particularly keen on having lots of these highly polluting, highly dirty industries at home. So it's very expensive. So we, that also puts us, you know, this is what economics is about, deep down. It's about choices and trade-offs, and you know, we need to also puts, you know, this is what economics is about, deep down, it's about choices and tradeoffs, and, you know, we need to trade off supply security against the higher costs, and including the environmental costs that this will bring. I think the best way to think about this is that of an insurance. We all used to buying insurance and paying insurance premium against bad things that might happen, so that we're covered in the event of some event that, you know, we say like this might happen, we hope it might not happen ever. But in case it happens, it's not the end of our personal finances. We can rebuild our houses or whatever. And what we're talking now about sort of geoeconomics and economic security security. the end of our personal finances, we can rebuild our houses or whatever. And what we're talking now about, sort of, geoeconomics and economic security, these agendas are very much like buying insurance. It's inefficient, of course, to build another chip factory where someone else can do it better. And more efficiently, we should trade. But if you think about the possibility that these trade routes might not be secure, that foreign powers might use or abuse that position in supply chains and not deliver the chips when we need them, or not the gas or the energy or whatever, then you might say, okay, we're willing to pay a certain insurance premium, do things to some things at home or reshore French or some of this production, but we have to pay price. I think we have to prepare populations that we're throwing sand in the wheels of global trade and that will have a cost. In some cases, that may be frank, I think making antibiotics a few cents more expensive seems like a very low cost to low price to pay for having you know enough medication for our children in the winter, which is something that has come up in Europe in recent in recent years time and again. In other cases it will really be expensive and we need to think hard whether we want to do that and go through with it. I was speaking to one central banker today about climate change and the challenges that brings us. And he said he's ultimately a techno-optimist that these problems will be solved. Are you a geopolitical optimist? Would you say? I do think, and I think that's a constant of modern history. It's much easier, and you're much more right, being optimistic about the progress of technology, than about the progress of humans and peace for relations, and the potential we have to get along with each other. OK. On that note, thank you very much indeed. But before we wrap up, we always have a question that we ask all I guess on the podcast on the podcast, on the podcast, which is for a hot tip linked to the topic we've been discussing today. Were you able to come up with them? Look, yes, I thought about this obviously and and I think it's I think these geopolitical shifts that we're talking about are part of a broader shift in sort of the governance in democracies and their relationship to autocracies and their very worrisome tendencies also in in Western democracies or European and American elections coming up where some of the foundations that a lot of what we did sort of the operating system that we have including central bank independence all these things that we take for granted are actually much less secure than we for long-term thought they are something the crisis that we you know diagnosed in in domestic and Western societies is very real. And it's something that we should not lose sight when we debate. You know, all this, you mentioned the world technocratic issues of how to set certain economic policies and how to think about, you know, trades and supply chain is a very abstract concept. But I think there's a very real danger right now that some of the democratic base on which are prosperity post-war which was built is slipping. And so long story cut short, I very much recommend in that context reading and hearing to the extent that's possible, into Martin Wolf's book, The Crisis of Democratic Capitalism, because I think it's, it comes, it goes really, it's very readable and he's a great writer, but it really goes to the heart of this moment where, you know, there are lots of challenges out there, but when do challenges turn into a crisis when the governance systems that we have, are themselves in crisis, are themselves in crisis that we have, and, and challenges out there, but when do challenges turn into a crisis? Challenges turn into a crisis when the governance systems that we have are themselves in crisis and are not possibly not able or at least not perceived to be able to deal with these challenges. And I think that makes the current moment very dangerous and very important to understand, so that's my recommendation and it's unfortunately not a cheerful note. I've heard very good things about the book though. So that's the crisis of democratic capitalism by Martin Wolf. That brings us to the end of this episode. I want to thank you, Murat Sheelowek, who's president of the Kielen's chief of the world economy, for joining the conversation here in Sinja at the ECB Forum on Central Banking. For those of you looking to hear more about some of the topics we discussed today, you can check out the show notes there you'll see more of Morris's research and to rewatch some of the discussions that took place at this forum. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Paul Gordon if you like what you've heard. Please subscribe, leave us a review and in the spirit of Europe I'd like to end in Portuguese, of course, and say a te, a prosima. Until next time, thanks for listening.