 The European Central Bank's governing council decided at its most recent monetary policy meeting to lower interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point. It was the first time we cut rates in five years, but more importantly it came after a series of 10 rate hikes in a row that ran from July 2022 to September 2023. Those rate hikes were needed to fight rising inflation, which peaked at 10.6% in late 2022, driven by a series of shocks, such as Russia's invasion of Ukraine, that disrupted supply chains, and sent energy prices soaring. Now, inflation is much, much closer to our 2% goal, and the rate cut marks a new phase of our monetary policy. But what exactly that phase will entail is not yet clear because there is still a lot of uncertainty. It's against this backdrop that central bankers, academics and analysts will be in Sintra, Portugal, from the first to the third of July for the annual ECB forum on central banking. This year's topic is a monetary policy in an era of transformation and one of those attending is our executive board member and chief economist Philip R Lane who I'm delighted to welcome in the studio today to discuss those latest decisions. It's a pleasure to be here Paul. Now you're listening to the ECB podcast bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Paul Gordon. This is the first time I've done this podcast but Philip is an old hand so welcome back. Great to have you here. Let's start with the main news. Philip as we noted you and your colleagues of the governing council lowered our three key interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point before that you'd raise rates by four and a half percentage points at an unprecedented speed in the history of the euro area. Since September rates have been on hold, and now rates have been cut. So tell us how you came to this decision to act. So as you said in the introduction, there's a very good reason that we did have the hiking cycle, which went, as you say, from July 22 to September 23. And we had inflation at the extraordinary level of 10.6% in October 2022. And last September when we did go to a key policy rate of 4% essentially the narrative at the time was even if inflation was falling because it was falling by then we had a concern that inflation would remain too high for too long. So in other words, that inflation always has a kind of dynamic element, and having been at double digits in late 22, more or less by September last year, in place with around 5. So come down, but five is very far away from 2%. And what we basically decided that, we can see progress, we don't necessarily need to keep on hiking, but we need essentially to enter into a holding phase. And we would be watching, essentially to enter into a holding phase and we would be watching we'd be watching essentially to see is inflation continuing to improve? Are we increasingly confident that inflation will come back towards our targets within a reasonable time periods which you know for further discussions these days is is the second half of 2025 which is about a year, a year and a half from now. And essentially what happened is last autumn inflation continued to come down. This year there's been kind of a little bit of bumpiness in the data, but it's still the case inflation now is mid-tous. So the assessment is to complete the journey, to complete the return to 2%, going from the mid-tues to 2% still needs, I think, for some time, a restrictive interest rate. But I think that keeping it at 4% for too long would maybe carry carried on risks. So it's a careful step to go from 4 to 375. If you remember in the hiking cycle there's some fairly big movements in each meeting. So this is a step and as you know what we did in parallel is to communicate exactly when the next step will be how quickly we're going to move between this year and next year will be data dependent so we are in a world of uncertainty there are many open questions but we also need to recognise having an inflation rate now in the mid-tuse is a very different environment to last September when we when we made that final hike. And it's a very different environment if you like to that very difficult period in especially in 2022 when inflation was rising so quickly. So I do think it's a new phase, but as you say exactly what that phrase is going to look like, let's see. You mentioned restrictive, sound that interest rates are in restrictive territory, so we're restricting the economy, which is the point, of course, this is how you bring inflation down by restricting demand, but that also means economic pain for companies, for households, generally speaking. It doesn't seem so bad at this point. What is the state of the economy? So I think there is a very big fundamental factor which you've just implicitly raised there, which is we do have low unemployment. Absolutely the single biggest economic problem would be if we saw unemployment rising. We don't have that. I think that does mean the urgency around the world of bringing rates down quickly we don't have that context. But we still have to recognize we had basically 15 months from late 22 until basically the end of last year when the European economy was flatlining. We see restrictiveness in a kind of limited amount of investment in housing and we know housing is a big issue around Europe. Limited business investment and consumption has been very modest. So people not only care about having a job, but they care also about are we investing in our future? What is my living standard like in terms of consumption? So I think we are clearly restrictive, and we do have in our forecast that the economy basically from now on should be recovering at a good clip. But that's recovering from if you like a subdued level. And so multi-policity we think it's still going to be restrictive because that rebound phase when you're coming off the bottom,'s still below if like the where the trend of the economy should take us and so I think the spare capacity in the European economy so we can grow for a while without creating additional inflation pressure and that is if you like the sweet spot what we're trying to make sure we still continue to disinflate but we but also to make sure to make sure to make sure the the sweet spot of what we're trying to do. We're trying to make sure we still continue to disinflate but we but also to make sure the economy starts to grow again and to deliver all that it needs to deliver for the European population. And this is the much talked about soft landing which is a simplistic term but... Well I think it's very important isn this is a, it's also obviously a popular term in America, I do not describe the European situation like that because remember we have had 15 months, five quarters where the economy did not grow very much. So in the labour market, yes, there has been a soft landing in the labour market, but I think for many businesses, for many businesses, for many people who would like to see more housing being built, more infrastructure being built, to see their companies invest in the future, to see the European economy become more productive. This has not been free. And we need to make sure that we do our job. So yes we need to take our time to make sure information comes back to targets but also keep an eye on these side effects. So what happens after a rate cut typically is that people want to know when's the next rate cut? Yeah. You've talked about this uncertainty. The president was very clear that there's no pre-commitment to our rate path at the moment. How do you go about handling this uncertainty as you decide what to do next? So I think this is a very important issue. And I think over these months where we've emphasized meeting by meeting decision making, I think it's a very good way to handle the uncertainty. So I think in terms of communicating with the public, it's a very strong message to send is essentially we're ready, we're ready if there are upside surprises. So if there's upside surprises, clearly we're going to do less. We're ready if there are downside surprises where we can move more quickly. So the speed of what we do between this year and next year will depend essentially on how that uncertainty plays out. One version is essentially the world proceeds in a fairly calm way. Another version is that there are new events around the world that kind of put upward pressure in prices. And we also need to keep an open mind that we can also have events which lead to surprisingly fast disinflation. So the no pre-commitment is another way of saying the central bank will be agile, we will be responding to the information that comes in for every meeting. And the information can come in from many different places, including actions of central banks elsewhere or the outcomes of economies else work, correct? Sure, it's a global economy, but let me focus or let me emphasize, there should be no doubt that we have a, the area is a continental-sized economy. By far, the most important factors are at home. So how the conditions in Europe heavily influenced in terms of the financial system by what we decide? That is most important. But big events, big events elsewhere will spill over into global commodity markets, into the financial markets, into exchange rates. So we always are very attentive to global developments. But I would say we're not a small open economy. We have a lot of autonomy and this is why most important will be how the European economy develops. Now this uncertainty that's out there is a key feature of this year's ECB forum on central banking. That takes place at the start of July in Sintra as noted. We'll focus on monetary policy in an era of transformation. It's our biggest conference of the year, brings together central bankers, policy makers, academics from all over the world. So we're looking for some insightful conversations. We're also publishing the research papers of the Young Economist Prize in Finalists. We're also publishing the research papers of the Young Economist Prize in finalists. These will be discussed at the event. And for listeners, take a look at our show notes. You can already have a look there and let us know what you think. Philip, you'll be at the event, of course, a key part of that. What are you looking forward to most there? So, I mean, this is, I think, a very important annual event. We put a lot of planning into it and really this here I would say there's really two parts to it. One is trying to understand what's been happening in these years. So among the kind of the sessions, there be a session on you know where did this high inflation come from, what is the contribution of different factors, and also to be a session on where did this high inflation come from, what is the contribution of different factors, and also to be a session about how central banks have responded in terms of interest rates. So that's our core business. But on top of that, the future of the European economy very much depends on factors such as productivity, so we're going to have a session on productivity, and also a session on biodiversity. So you would, I think the listeners will be aware that we're focusing a lot on global warming and climate change, but I think the span of this extends to thinking about the interaction between the natural world and the economic world. And this work, I think, on biodiversity, various central banks now working on it. We also will have kind of discussion panels on geopolitical and this work I think on biodiversity, very central banks now working on it. We also will have a kind of a discussion panels on geopolitical shocks as we just talked about this is a and also about what we call equilibrium interest rates which is basically in the long-term future as inflation comes back to down to 2% and if there's no new shock arriving, where do we think interest rates are headed? But let me also say, there is a bit of a gear shift this year in some ways, which I think goes back to what I just said. The ECB is a big part of the world financial system, and we should also take a global perspective. So there's going to be a new session on the international financial system, which will feature the governor of the South African Reserve Bank and also one of our own class not who's head of the Financial Stability Board. And then the policymaker panel of course will have a president of the guard and Jay Pow from the Federal Reserve, but also Roberto Campos, who's the governor of the Bank of Brazil. So in terms of the central not only being a European forum, but a global forum for Central Banking, I think those innovations will really help us expand the scope of what we do in Central. There's some big themes out there, some important ones. I just want to quickly focus in on one, which is productivity, because the productivity puzzle is the buzzword you get out there and why Europe seems to be lagging behind the US and whether we really have a major problem there. What do you think? So I think there's two different conversations and it's important to bear out in mind. and we recently in these speed block some of our researchers expanded upon this. So again, over the near term, we think as the economy recovers, there's a cyclical pickup and productivity. Because right now, there's bare capacity. If demand goes up, firms in different sectors can produce more without necessarily having to invest more or add more people. But even once you look through that, because that's a short-term cyclical recovery, as you say, there are big questions about the future. And beyond thinking about capital markets union, banking union, the amount of investment we need for the green transition. We also think about you know Europe is a place to do business where people compare and contrast with America. We have to think about automation, innovation, AI. So this is again I don't think Cincha is going to settle the debate. But in terms of helping people to think through these fundamental issues, it's very important. Okay. That brings us to the end of this episode. I want to thank you, Philip, for joining us for this conversation. However, before you go, as always, we do ask all I guess on the podcast for a hot tip. And I wonder if you have one for today. I do. I think this is super hot. So we've taught a lot about topical issues, about issues that have been right in front of us at the moment. We've talked a bit about the future in terms of productivity, biodiversity, but let me also emphasize that here at ECB, you know, we have people who think a lot about the whole history of money, the whole history of central banking. So if you're looking for a beach read, Ulrich Binsile, who's the director general of market infrastructure here at DCB, does have a very interesting and short book. So it's called Central Banking before 1800. So it's about what we can learn about basically the evolution of what we now think of central banks between 1400s and the 1800s. To many people they may not have taught very much about this and Ulrich I think provides a very nice guide into showing how the world did not start in 1999 with the launch of the ECB. And I would say, going back and looking at that period between 1400 and 1800s, might be a very nice way to spend the summer. That sounds like some great holiday reading. Thank you very much indeed, Philip. So I want to thank ECB chief economist Philip Arlen for joining the conversation. That brings us to the end of this episode. For those of you looking to hear more about some of the topics we discussed today, though, you will want to follow our ECB forum on central banking, taking place from the 1st to the 3rd of July, from Sintra, Portugal. It will be live-streamed, so check out the show notes to get the link to the program and to the papers. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Paul Gordon if you like what you've heard please subscribe and leave us a review and in the spirit of Europe I'd like to say in check nah fleadow. I hope that went well. Until next time, thanks for listening.