(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

The European Central Bank decided at its latest monetary policy meeting to cut interest rates by 25 basis points as inflation gets closer to stabilizing at the target of 2% over the medium term. Now these decisions are never simple of course, this one was taken amid a great deal of economic uncertainty. Geopolitical tensions have mounted, the US presidential election has elevated the risk of sweeping tariffs imposed by Donald Trump. 

Longer-term issues include Europe's role in the world and how well it can compete economically. The Draghi and Letter reports this year highlighted key areas in which the EU should and perhaps must take action. You're listening to the 99th episode of the ECB podcast bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. 

My name is Paul Gordon. So it has been a complicated year and one man who has to keep a close eye on all of these moving parts and figure out what they mean for ECB policy is Philip Lane, Chief Economist and a member of the Executive Board and he joins us once again today. Very good day Philip. 

Good morning. So let's zoom out initially. Let's take a look at all these events that have been going on the year. 

It has been extremely complicated as I said. We've had the ongoing Russian war against Ukraine that's had a major impact in the past particularly on energy prices but that lingers. They're down from their peaks of course but the war is ongoing and we're facing an increasingly fragmented geopolitical landscape unrest in the Middle East. 

We've got the events in the US. How did geopolitics influence your work this year and when you're coming to these decisions? So I think it's important to differentiate as you say geopolitics, politics and maybe the world economy. These are very closely interconnected so political events in individual countries as you mentioned we will have a new US administration in the new year are an important factor.

Geopolitics in the sense of countries making decisions about how much they want to integrate in the world economy as you say military events. These are all very important but I would say also again it's a very interconnected world economy. So coming back to mapping from geopolitics to our decisions is we do have to think about how these geopolitical events are influencing firms, are influencing households, are influencing governments and then how they show up in investment, consumption, exports, inflation. 

So it's a mix of being very as you say zooming out but then mapping that to the very detailed pricing data. So let me advertise one of the reports coming out from the ECB fairly soon is a report on essentially a global fragmentation. So there's been a lot of work this year. 

I've been talking about it in some recent presentations but I think it's gonna be published in the coming weeks and this is really looking at the longer-term issues in terms of global trade and also trade in individual products because some of the discussion is about strategically important items rather than sweeping tariffs and everything. So I think we operate at different speeds. We have to carry in our head that history of globalization, the history of how fragmentation has happened in the past but also of course we make decisions every six weeks. 

So it's something that's ongoing and maybe coming back to the particular issue you raised there about tariffs is that this is something of course we're looking at but this is going to be with us for quite a while because it's very unlikely that the world changes in one day. Exactly what happens next year and in the coming years will evolve over time. I mean the tariffs are as you say they're very much in focus at the moment and some comments have been made in public which is the impact on economic growth of sweeping tariffs has got to be negative right? On inflation though which is that primary mandate rather more complicated. 

So I think that's essentially what we said in the monetary policy statement that we think it's clearly to the downside for growth in an overall sense and exactly that the effect on inflation is really uncertain. I can point to some forces which may add to inflation at least in the near term. I can point to other forces such as lower investment, higher precautionary saving which would be deflationary. 

So it's going to be something we'll be looking at in great detail and the exact design of any tariffs, the scope, the global reaction, all of these will matter but the message is indeed for the economy mostly negative. For inflation it's two-sided risk and this is something we're going to have to manage. Okay well I don't envy you having to come to these decisions but you do have to do that. 

So you've been taking action through the year to bring inflation closer to our 2% medium-term target. We went from a phase of holding rates in the first half of the year then we started cutting rates and we're getting close to 2% but we're not quite there yet are we? I mean would you say inflation is beaten or do we have to be cautious? So I think the key word is that we want to be at 2% sustainably. So we are close to 2% now but the mix is basically falling energy prices but services inflation which is still around 4%. 

So the sustainability requires a greater balance. So what we think is going to happen next year is we're not going to have the ongoing fall in energy prices. That's not the most, that's not the base case. 

On the other hand we do think after a couple of years of the services sector reacting and coping with the really big price increases we had in energy, in goods a couple of years ago. The service sector is very diverse, many different activities within that. We think the adjustment of services prices, which by the way is very closely connected to the adjustment of wages because services hire a lot of people, that this will basically enter a kind of completion phase next year. 

So it's not right now, here we are in December, we don't think service inflation now has fully adjusted but we do think over the course of next year a lot of the final adjustment will take place. In the monetary policy decision there was a lot of focus in the markets and in media was on the change in the language around the use of the word restrictive. Could you just explain a little bit about what you actually did there? So I think the best way to think about this is if inflation is kind of, the momentum looks like it's above 2% you want to be restrictive, you want inflation momentum to come down towards 2%. 

And essentially what we see now is we see inflation momentum more in the direction of being around 2% right now in terms when we look forward. So therefore it's no longer a one-sided issue of saying we want to bring inflation down. As you say, on average in 2023 inflation was around 5%, at the end of 2022 it's around 10%. 

So we've made a lot of progress and over that period it was clear that you need monetary policy to be restrictive. Now we are making this transition where we want inflation to stabilize around 2%. If we are restrictive for too long, inflation will fall below 2% on a kind of medium-term basis and that creates a new set of headaches which we don't want. 

So it is important to say we're going to set monetary policy appropriately. That's essentially a two-sided commitment. We will react if there's more upside pressure from all of these risks that might arise. 

We react if there's downside pressure such as a further slowdown in the economy and that's a very important signal and it was the right time to send it. Okay now further slowdown in economy, this is an important part. Let's look at some of the current measures of the economy. 

Unemployment is at 6.3% so that's a historic low. That's very impressive. Wage growth is pretty steep 4.4% in the third quarter but that's down from 4.7% in the second quarter. 

Economic growth is feeble. So the latest projections that you came out with were revised lower. The euro-euro economy is expected to grow just 0.7% this year, 1.1% in 2025. 

Far below the levels you would expect in the US for an example. When are things going to get better? Well in looking at our forecasts we do think there will be an improvement and it's very important really to set the baseline expectation here. It is that the economy, the solid reasons to believe there will be an improvement in the economy next year, the year after. 

So essentially what's happened is some of the building blocks are now in place. This year people's incomes have grown more quickly than prices. They have greater ability to consume but what is true is even though consumption is now rising there's maybe a little bit of a delay in that because in a world of uncertainty maybe some people are holding back on consumption decisions and also the very natural I think adjustment phase after really being you know hit heavily by high inflation for a couple of years. 

You know adjusting to a situation where people are confident they can consume more to renovate a house to buy a new electric car and so on. I think there's good reasons to believe this effect would be stronger next year. Second as you said at the start we have been reducing the interest rate now for the last six months and as interest rates fall people again who might have said well it's not the right time to to buy a house, it's not the right time to take out a car loan, it's not the right time to to invest if I'm a firm. 

Now interest rates lower and again the market thinks there's more to come. Then some of these plans will kick in next year and the year after. So I do think the next couple of years the baseline is a recovery but let me say because you also worked in there in your question a comparison with the US. 

When we say recovery we what we're thinking about is a recovery to where we think Europe's current potential is and there's a much bigger question which is why be satisfied with the current assessment of potential? Why not be more ambitious? Why not indeed look at the US but also look at what people like Mario Draghi and Rico Letta have said in recent reports and say look there are clear policies here which by and large there's a huge opportunity for Europe by working together, building a single market, cooperating on energy policies, building a capital markets union, improving the banking union. All of this will help Europe grow more quickly. Europe has many strengths but we do think that there can be a kind of serious uplift in the potential of the European economy and that is for the European community of policymakers, for people around Europe to think about and to work on. 

So essentially multi-policy can bring you ideally close to potential but that potential is not a fixed number. It does depend on the wider policy choices in terms of investment, structural reform, education policies and that's really I think where maybe the conversation needs to intensify. Right. 

I mean the reports you're referring to here for anybody who wants some deeper reading are by the former Italian Prime Minister Enrico Letta and by the former ECB president and former Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi. These reports I mean these were very big. They made a splash when they landed but you know the question is whether the ripples continue, whether people actually take notice. 

Do you feel a sense of more urgency now that we've kind of been asleep, maybe not asleep but dozing slightly for some years and now the advent of people like Donald Trump, the invasion of Ukraine has woken people up? Well I think actually everyone's been busy, been busy with the pandemic, been busy with the war, been busy with the high inflation. So I would say more that essentially now that inflation is kind of stabilizing, now the pandemic is maybe more in the background even though of course many effects still linger. These were I think many issues were on the table already five years ago. 

What is new I think is the hard evidence coming in about the next wave of technological progress. So the hard evidence you know mostly in the US now from the potential of AI. Now it's still very uncertain, the timelines are very uncertain but there's been a visible pickup in productivity growth in America and this does raise questions. 

It signals opportunities that reinforces I think the debate we've been having. I would also say this is all simultaneous with the demographic change in Europe where there's a lot of retirements coming and simultaneous with the green transition. So I think the ECB has been I think fairly consistent in recent years by saying there's a lot going on. 

There's a lot going on in terms of this decade that is so important in terms of these major structural shifts which are operating at the same time, they're interacting but basically the fundamental issue is all of these can be handled a lot better in an economy that's more dynamic and a more dynamic economy will make it a lot easier to handle all of these issues. Now before you go we're gonna ask you for a hot tip and I referred to you know sort of potentially dozing through the years as you point out in fact there'd be lots and lots of crises and we've had to deal with all those crises and I think your hot tip is crisis related, correct? Right so it's from a book written by my predecessor at the Central Bank of Ireland Patrick Conaghan and the book is called the Central Bank as Crisis Manager and maybe what I would say is essentially this really covers a lot. It covers the role of central banks in banking crises. 

We know a lot about banking crises around the world. It covers financial markets crises you know how central banks need to respond and of course at the start of pandemic there's a lot of action in financial markets but also covers essentially around the world what happens when a country gets into a crisis and so if you want to know more about Lebanon, if you want to know more about Argentina, Patrick who used to work at the World Bank has really a global perspective so I would say this is a good read and I learned a lot by reading this but people who are kind of curious about the world this really has a lot but maybe the message is the central bank needs always be prepared. Be prepared we don't know when and if a crisis will ever come along. 

Of course we invest a lot in preventing crises through supervision, through other risk management measures but it's so important for central banks everywhere to think about future crises and to be really ready if these events come along. I think in the pandemic we did a lot with the PEP and with other measures but I would say we always need to maintain our level of readiness of preparation. Yeah I went to a crisis training course recently where the three scenarios were the Asian financial crisis which broke out when I went to Asia. 

I didn't cause it. The Greek debt crisis which I experienced as well and then COVID as everybody experienced and I think the point the message there was don't forget these you know I mean they're important lessons here but of course every crisis will be new there'll always be something. Yeah and it's what I mean crisis don't happen that often so to preserve the memory to kind of and this book is one way of preserving the memory of many crises over the years and so in addition to being a good at Christmas read it's also maybe something to have on the shelf. 

Okay Philip thank you very much indeed for your time. That brings us to the end of this episode. Listeners of course check out the show notes for more on this topic. 

You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Paul Gordon. If you like what you've heard please subscribe and leave us a review and until next time thanks for listening. In the spirit of Europe we're gonna end in Irish now you're gonna correct me Philip when I say this badly. 

Slán. Is that correct? Slán. Slán. 

Thank you very much indeed for your time. Very good. Thank you Paul.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)