 Inflation has been on people's mind over the last two years and many struggle to get by. Here on the podcast we've spoken about its causes, its consequences and its evolution. But there's something else that we haven't touched upon yet. Inflation expectations. So how people think inflation will move in the future. This is a crucial factor to consider while fighting inflation. You might have heard the media talk about inflation expectations going up or down. But if you don't know what they are, or why they matter, you are in the right place. You're listening to the ECB podcast, bringing you are in the right place. You're listening to the ECB podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Stefania Secula. With me today are Jeff Kenny and Dimitriz Gjorgaracos, their researchers here at ECB. Measuring how people think inflation will evolve is difficult, but has come a long way in recent years. One example of this progress is the Consumer Expectation Survey, which Jeff and Dimitri's launch here at the ECB in 2020. The survey looks at what people in the euro area think and what they expect when it comes to the economy, of course including inflation. Jeff Demetris, welcome to the ECB podcast. Thanks a lot. Thanks a lot, it's funny. Our job is to keep price stable. We do this by making sure that inflation remains low, stable and predictable. The level of inflation today can influence how people expect prices to develop in the future. And these expectations are important. People use them to make decisions about their spending, borrowing, and investing. And businesses also keep them in mind when setting prices for goods and services. Jeff, can you tell us more about what inflation expectations are for the people who don't know and why they matter for central banks? Yeah, sure, thanks, Stefania. So inflation expectations, I think as you said, they refer to the level of inflation that people expect to occur in the future. So we can think about trying to measure the expected level of inflation over different time horizons, for example, what people expect inflation to be one year from now, or what they expected to be even three or five years from now. So why do these expectations matter for central banks at all? Well, let's take the example of the expectations for inflation three to five years ahead. These provide an indication of how consistent people's thoughts and beliefs about the future are with our price stability objective, which as you know is to achieve 2% inflation over the medium term. If expectations drift increasingly too far away from this target, it could be a worrying sign that people's actions will start to diverge from the actions that they would take under the assumption that price stability will be assured. And this could be something related for example in terms of consumption right they could stop consuming or consuming more. Exactly yes so their beliefs could affect their behavior in in the economy. Yeah. So for example you know it could influence how firms prices. It can also affect the outcome of wage negotiations. So, you know, to summarize, sometimes expectations can result in a kind of self-fulfilling dynamic that central banks may need to protect against by adjusting interest rates and monetary policy. Let's talk about how people form their inflation expectations. Demetris, what kind of things shape how people, how someone expects price to develop? Thank you, Stephanie. One thing to keep in mind is that there is a major difference of consumer's inflation expectations with experts or forecast or professional forecasters. The consumer's inflation expectations, I could say, tend to be quite personal in the sense that they depend on people's own experiences and activities. One example of this is the role of shopping experience and frequently purchased goods, like foods and energy prices. And basically we find that such items have a proportionally large influence on the formation of consumers' inflation expectations compared with other goods and services. So how much I spend with food is going to influence my inflation expectations more than, for example, items that I don't buy so often. Absolutely. The fact that you frequently purchase food has a greater influence. Now, some research has suggested that the role of person shopping experiences can help us understand why, for example, women tend to have higher inflation expectations than men. For example, when we look at households where women and men say are the shopping responsibilities more equally, I would say, we observe almost no difference in their expectations about inflation. Another example is the role of memories and lifetime experience. For example, if someone experienced a period of hyperinflation in the past, this means Another example is the role of memories and lifetime experience. For example, if someone experienced a period of hyperinflation in the past, this means a period of really high prices, such a life experience may also impact someone's inflation expectation, how sensitive then this person tends to be to news about. Okay so if I grow up in a country with very high inflation this tends to stay with me this experience tends to stay with me and influences how I perceive inflation also later on in life for example. Exactly and not only that this will have some research evidence that suggests that could be transmitted through generations actually. So for example, if my grandmother experienced hyperinflation, this may influence how I think about inflation too. Okay, so we need to be careful because we are going to transmit this to our children basically, right? Interesting. So, and these are all kind of very personal experiences, of course. And Jeff, are there other things that can shape our inflation expectations? Yes indeed. So there's this personal dimension but there's also the dimension of the wider economy and the general economic situation and how that can also influence people's expectations. So we've learned that inflation expectations do reflect the broader economic concerns going on in the real economy, and in particular, negative news that gives rise to, for example, negative economic sentiment. A good recent example of this was in 2022, where in March, following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the ECB's consumer expectations survey, which you mentioned in the beginning, Stefania, recorded an immediate and a stark increase in inflation expectations as a result of the invasion in Ukraine. So another broader concern that we clearly observe when we think about how expectations are formed is that people tend to extrapolate very recent changes in prices when forming their expectations. So what they do exactly so? So for example if they observe a change today they tend to think this change is going to persist very far into the future, maybe even over the next year, but also even over further horizons into the future, three and even five years ahead. So, you know, in this sense, there's evidence that consumers may overreact to certain price changes. And of course, this has also important implications for central banks and monetary policy. So for example in a situation where consumers may be overreacting to a price shock, it may be important for central banks to step up their communication in order to help set the record straight and explain what is actually going on in the economy. On the other hand, you know, the mere fact that it may be an overreaction means that we can't, it's not that we can ignore the risks that may be associated with an overreaction and expectations because it's precisely that overreaction that can give rise to this type of self-fulfilling dynamic that we were discussing earlier on. Yeah, interesting. So basically what I have in terms of information influences what I'm going to think is going to be the future and if I interpret this information in an overreactive manner this could be a problem also in terms of what this produces and then for the central bank to take into account. Interesting, interesting. But how do these sometimes very personal perceptions actually change the prices that we pay? Could you, Demeter's, give us an example, a very concrete one? Sure. Well, you may think of a person that stops, say, paying for a coffee, because its price has increased, then if more and more persons doing so, basically they will start buying less, this will make demand go down. And this ultimately helps prices to moderate. But there is also another aspect of this. Basically, if many people stop buying a particular type of good, they are also indicating to the company that produces it, that they won't tolerate this increasing prices, which in theory should push then the company to either lower them down prices or not increase them further if you like. Another example and something that I think is really important to central banks is that if people think that inflation will stay high for longer, workers would likely ask for higher wages. And if people search for higher wages in other jobs, then the companies will have pressures to increase prices because they need to pay these people. So in such a scenario, elevated inflation expectations can contribute to what we often call a wage price spiral. Obviously, as central bank, we don't want this to happen so that's why it's so important that we monitor closely consumers inflation expectations. Yeah, yeah. So basically it's like a dance. You need to know what the the consumers will expect and what could be their next move and so that they get to know also bit what the central central banks will do as a next move so it is really this kind of flow of information. At this stage I want to dig deeper into the measuring part that you have mentioned. I said it earlier now inflation expectations can be very personal and what we said one of you said a minute ago, even in the same family, I think it was you, Demetris, who said, now even in the same family, inflation expectations could be very different. Jeff, how exactly do you measure the inflation expectations in the consumer expectation survey? Yeah, so we have measures of inflation expectations that are consistently measured across consumers in 11 euro area countries and this covers about 94% of the euro area population. So very representative of the overall population in the euro area. And we can analyze these expectations for younger and older consumers, for men and women, and we can examine also their evolution over time, every month, also in relation to other economic developments and other economic decisions that consumers are taking as well. We ask people if they have, first of of all noticed any changes in the prices for goods and services over the past 12 months. So these are measures of their perceptions about present inflation. And then we ask them to think about the future and we ask them how much they think the prices of goods and services will go up over the next 12 months or over the next three years. And this personal belief about future inflation is what we know as inflation expectations. Beyond these measures of expectations themselves, we also try and elicit people's individual uncertainty about future inflation. So this gives us a sense about how confident consumers are in their beliefs about the future and this is also really helpful in our analysis in in trying to attract the implications of these changes and expectations. So if I'm very confident about what I think I might change my mind if you ask me next time, for example. So this is something that gives you a good basis to rely on the data with certain percentages or something like this I guess. Yes I think Stevania that's a very good example as well. So today the midries we released our latest results. What have you seen, what did you observe? Exactly Stephanie, according to our latest results from the Consumer Expectation Survey, the median expectation for inflation over the next 12 months was 3% in March 2024, slightly down from 3.1% in February. But this should be compared with a peak in expected inflation expectations towards the end of 2022 that was close to 6%. Okay, but this means people now expect inflation to go down, basically. Basically, they gradually adjust their inflation expectations down. Then, as a Jeff already alluded to, it is important to remind that this measure of expected inflation are not strictly comparable with official inflation statistics. This is because we basically ask people about how they expect prices in general to evolve over the future. And we do this because many consumers don't follow as we discuss closely official inflation indicators, but instead they have a sense about how prices will evolve in the future based on their own personal experience. Exactly, we mentioned, no? As a result, their individual responses can reflect their personal consumption activities which can be quite different across different demographic groups. In general though we find that once we have it across many consumers the patterns over time we observe are broadly consistent I would say with how official inflation statistics evolve over time. And do we have some examples for our listeners? Like for example, what do you observe in terms of social demographic? Like younger people expectations recently in the latest one. We still observe this gender gap that I mentioned earlier. So women expect higher inflation. Relatively higher, especially as they're engaged in more exposure to changes in price and more shopping. Yeah, yeah. Okay. One thing I think that is worth to emphasize, given what you've asked, Stephanie, is that this type of downward movement that you highlighted and Dimitri's highlighted, is this is fairly common across, you know, most of the groups. Okay so young people. Exactly. Maybe the pace of decline has been different across some but the general pattern of decline is observed across widely across across different groups. Very interesting, very interesting thanks. So now the most important question is if inflation expectations are so important for keeping price stable and this is our mandate at ECB what can we do to help people form them to form their inflation expectations? So yeah I think a first thing we can do and we we have to do is to deliver on our mandate so ultimately the research shows that central banks are judged on their track record. Yeah. So if they have a good track record of ensuring price stability, people are much more likely to believe that they will achieve price stability in the future. Okay. But a second thing that we can do, and we've alluded to this already, is to communicate more actively with the public about inflation. All of the evidence seems to suggest the need for this. In particular it shows that consumers will respond in a reasonable way to simple and factual information about inflation. Cl inflation. Correct. Exactly. Exactly. And you know this is very important in a world where there's a lot of information overload, fake news, that this simple and factual information really has an effect on consumers' beliefs about the future. And building up consumers' knowledge about monetary policy, you know, has also been shown to establish greater trust in the central bank. Trust is crucial for us because we need people to believe that we will continue fighting inflation until it has reached our 2% target. So here at the ECB, we recently conducted research, also with Demetrius and other colleagues, and in that research, we showed that when we communicate to people, our... Here at the ECB we recently conducted research also with Demetrius and other colleagues and in that research we showed that when we communicate to people are just simply telling them what our target is and when we explain how monetary policy plays a stabilizing role in the economy this can contribute to an increase in the perceived credibility that price stability will be maintained in the future. So this is where our communication has such a crucial role to play. If central bank communications are unclear, people will tend to form their views about future price changes based on their current or past inflation experiences, and this can result in a situation where people's expectations start to drift away in the wrong direction, making the task of maintaining price stability all the more difficult. Yes, so in this dance, we said before, no, the communication is essential, and maybe Dimitri is how it is so essential. Well, Stephanie, this is not easy to answer questions, I would say, because of course we have plenty of evidence to suggest that communicating with the general public can be quite effective. However, reaching out to people is not always easy. I would say it's more challenging. First of all, it's very difficult to reach out, especially to non-expert audiences, that don't pay a lot of attention to central bank news. We see, for example, in the Consumer Expectations Survey, that about 30% of euro area consumers say that they are not much or not at all interested in monetary policy. So despite the fact that inflation is something that affects everyone in their daily lives, it's still difficult to reach out to these people. One practical strategy I would say is to use, try to use a diverse range of different communication channels from traditional media like TV and newspapers to social media and of course podcasts. Another thing we can do is to ensure that we have diversity in our policy committees. In other words, that we have diversity in the messengers, if you like, not the message per se, such diversity is of value on its own right of course. For example, it can help ensure better policy decisions. However, it may also help with communication, and especially in building trust and knowledge across underrepresented groups. So the messenger matters, right? Exactly. Interesting. And this is why also conversations like these ones, where we try to break down more complex topics into easier, more digestible elements or components are so important. So thank you very much Jeff and Demedris. But before we wrap up we have questions that we ask all our guests on the podcast. And that's for a hot tip linked to the topic we've been discussing today. Have you thought of something inspiring for our listeners? So I don't know if it's hot, okay, But it's a tip at least for someone interested to learn more about this topic. So we recently published a study. It was in the ECB Working Papers in March. And it has the catchy title, tell me something I don't already know. Okay. Learning in a high and a low inflation setting. And this kind of study was part of a large scale international collaboration. It involved economists and economic surveys from Europe, from the US, South America, and also from as far away as New Zealand. And the study really emphasises at this last point mentioned by Demetris, namely the challenges confronting central banks in their communication with the public. And this is particularly because of consumers, you know, varying attention to monetary policy and inflation. So, I mean, there is maybe a hot tip in that paper for central banks in terms of their communication and how they should go about meeting this communication challenge. And this is embodied in a quote from Benjamin Franklin, which we give at the start of the paper. So Franklin wrote about successful communication in his memoirs, and he said the following. He said, tell me and I forget. Teach me and I remember. Involve me and I learn. And I think this last point about involvement is really the hot tip for central bank communication. That it really needs to be about reaching out proactively and engaging with the public. And luckily, this is precisely what many central banks are already starting to do today. Interesting. Very, very interesting. And by the way, dear listeners, you're going to find in the show notes, the links to the research. By the way, you seem to be also very good listeners, because you like surveys so much. This means you want to listen to what people have to say. Dimitri's, any final thoughts on for our listeners. I find this a good opportunity to thank very much all these euro area citizens who spend time and effort to participate in our survey and serve their experiences. And not only their experiences, their thoughts, beliefs, expectations, and behavior. As we try to explain in this podcast, keeping track of their inflation expectations along with other expectations, of course, and decisions they make, it is of paramount importance for our analysis, helps us also to optimize the design of our policies and deliver on our price stability and a date. And I will conclude by saying, looking forward, perhaps listeners to this podcast may be also asked one day to take part in our survey. Who knows? And I hope that they listen to them, by listening to them, they make them see that their views can have indeed a very significant impact. Yes, absolutely, absolutely. Thank you so much, both of you. And this brings us to the end of this episode. I want to thank really ECB researchers Jeff Kenny and Dimitri's Gil Garrakis for this very interesting conversation. Dear listeners, check out the show notes for more on this topic. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Stefania Secola. If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review. And in the spirit of Europe, today I'd like to end in Slovak and say, Dovitania. Until next time, thanks for listening.