 Central banks across the world have been fighting high inflation for more than two years after a series of shocks pushed up energy and food prices. They've made great progress, but the fight isn't quite over yet. Inflation isn't yet back to target. Interest rates are still restrictive. And economic, geopolitical and environmental uncertainties host major challenges for our economies and for policy makers. This year's ECB Forum on Central Banking brought together Central Bankers and academics from across the world to meet in Sintra in Portugal to discuss monetary policy in an era of transformation. You're listening to the ECB podcast bringing you insights into the world of economics and and central banking. My name is Paul Gordon. At this year's ECB forum, President Christine Ligard, US Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell and Governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, Roberto Campos Nito, sat down to discuss the steps they've taken to fight inflation and the road ahead. The conversation was moderated by CNBCIC's Sarah Eisen. Let's listen to what they had to say. Thank you very much. I'm so honored to be back on this stage. We were here a year ago and it is my also great pleasure to welcome three people who need no introduction in this room. Chair Powell from the Federal Reserve, President Lagarde, President Lagarde, from Brazil. This time last year when we were all talking you guys were were in the sort of final process of hiking rates. Fast forward one year and now it's interesting while I'm gonna miss Governor Wada and his jokes, we've got three great panelists here going at different speeds, I would say, when it comes to reversing that course. So, we'd love to just open it up, President LeGuard, with you and ask, where are you in this process? Because you cut in June. So now what? Well, it's been a journey. You can't just say, oh, we cut in June. It's coming on the back of a period of hikes, which was unprecedented, facing shocks that I tried to describe yesterday over dinner, and followed by a period during which we held rates untouched and during which we held rates untouched and during which we were restrictive enough to actually see our medium-term target reach that 2% which is our objective. And most recently we have seen in our round of projections, which are really important, September, December, and June, we've seen that 2% target with an oscillation of 0.1 about it at the last quarter of 2025. So it's on that basis and on the basis of what I'm happy to describe as, you know, the three-legged reaction function and all the underlying data and information that feeds those three legs that we decided to do a 25 basis point Scots but in the same breath of air I also said that it was not a linear process that it was not a predetermined path that we were embarking upon, but a step that would be followed by further review of data, further understanding of where our three legs reaction function would be. So that's pretty much where we are and I would simply maybe add that we are very advanced in that disinflationary path, and we are in that sort of slow recovery, which came about during the first quarter, and which we hope will persevere, but all of that is flawed with uncertainties, and big question mark about the future. Sounds like you're setting up the market for a pause now. Is that right? I'm not setting up anything for you know anyone. I think that it's for everyone to really look into look under the skin of the economy and and see where it's heading and appreciating what our reaction function is and how we're likely to to decide. Chair Powell you have also been on a journey and have been on hold since last July, have not cut rates like the ECB in June. Why not? What are you waiting for? So let me say that sitting here last year, we didn't, there was a lot we didn't know, and we didn't know that we were just about to embark on a period of seven months of much lower inflation readings. We didn't realize that the second half of last year was going to be an extraordinary year from a growth standpoint and also from the same point of the labor market. So things actually worked out in the second half of last year in a remarkable way. Then as you know in the first quarter of this year we continue to have solid growth in the first half actually solid growth and the labor market that's still strong although we've seen continued rebalancing rebalancing in the labor balancing in the labor growth in the first half, actually, solid growth, and the labor market that's still strong, although we've seen a continued rebalancing in the labor market, and inflation after pausing in the first quarter now shows signs of resuming its disinflationary trend. So it's a little bit different journey. So where that leaves this is, we've made quite a bit of progress in bringing inflation back down to our target. While the labor market has remained strong and growth has continued, we want that process to continue. I think the last reading and the one before it to inflation, the one before it to a lesser extent, do suggest that we are getting back on a disinflationary path. We want to be more confident that inflation is moving sustainably down toward 2% before we start the process of reducing how tight our policy is of loosening policy. Now that's what we've said and what we would what we'd like to see is more data like like what we've been seeing recently. We'd also like to see the labor market remain strong. We've said that if we saw the labor market unexpectedly weakening that could is also something that could that could call for a reaction. How much more confident you want to be? The PCE number 2.6, that wasn't too bad that we got last week. That's right. So we're actually on a 12-month basis. We're actually at 2.6 both headline and core for for inflation. That's that's that represents really significant progress I think we peaked at 5.4% in core and the same thing has happened in headline we've gone from 7.1 to 2.6 so yes we've made a lot of progress. We wanted we just want to understand that that the levels that we're seeing are a true reading on what is actually happening with underlying inflation and as we were saying at the last part of last year people were saying you need to declare victory this is over and then we had a quarter of inflation which was well above three percent. with underlying inflation. And as we were saying at the last part of last year, people were saying, you need to declare victory, this is over. And then we had a quarter of inflation, which was well above 3%. So we want to be more confident, and frankly, because the U.S. economy is strong and the labor market is strong, we have the ability to take our time and get this right. That's what we're planning to do. So September? I'm not going to be landing on any specific dates here today. Let me also say that we're well aware that if we go too soon, that we could undo the good work we've done to bringing down inflation. And if we go too late, we could unnecessarily undermine the recovery and the expansion. And so we're aware that we have two-sided risks now, more so than we did a year ago. That's a big change. I'd say risks are coming much more into balance now. President Kompos, you have been on a different journey because you've actually been cutting rates for much of the last year and have recently paused. Why? What are you seeing in inflation data? And what are you going to do next? Okay so if you go back a little bit a history of time so Brazil was one of the first countries to hike rates I think in part because we had the different call on the dynamics of inflation both locally and globally and I think that turned out to to be correct and then at some point in time we started the easing cycle. And throughout this process of easing, we've seen that inflation has converged. We have some of the problems that are common to advanced economies and other Latin American countries, which is label markets very strong. So there were two points of attention. One was label market being that strong. So there were two points of attention. One was label market being that strong would that at some point in time mean inflation in the service and the service side. And even though we haven't seen that yet, what we try to do is to try to estimate what would be the components of labor in every service so that we can anticipate if that were to happen. We haven't seen it, but we think it's you know There is somewhat of a correlation when you look at the margin and so most recently we decided to pause that we had service inflation that could pick at some point in time and also because food prices were going back up a little bit and it's I don't I also think that's not only happening in Brazil is going to happen in some other places too but also has to do with a lot of noises that we had so we decided to interrupt the cycle more recently we've had had a sell-off in some of the emerging market countries. Brazil was more affected. But I think this has to do much more with noises that were created than the fundamentals. And the noises are related to two channels. One is the expectation on the path of fiscal policy, and the other one is expectation on the future of monetary policy. So when you had these two at the same time I think it created uncertainty enough that for us we needed to interrupt and see how we can fix that channel and how we can communicate better so that we can eliminate those noises because there is a big disconnection with the current data both fiscal and inflation data and the expectation. So what happened in Brazil is the expectation. started to the anchor even though the current data, both fiscal and inflation data, and the expectation. So what happened in Brazil is the expectation. Expectations started to the anchor, even though the current data is coming as expected. Right. So you're talking about the fall in the stock market and the real, recently, when you talk about the markets. But for us, what matters is how this gets into our reaction function. So I'm talking about expected inflation, the long end of interest rate curve. So we had somewhat of a steepening of the interest rate curve. We had the evaluation of the current rate curve. But for us what matters is the expected inflation, both implied inflation from the markets, and expecting inflation from the surveys, those have gone up. I mean, President Algar, you have described the path to 2 2% to 2. We got an inflation report in the Eurozone this morning, 2.5% not too bad, but core was high and services are still above 4%. So what is keeping prices so sticky? Well first of all we had as you said a number that was lower than last month. so we said it was bumpy and it's proving heading in the right direction for the indicator that we use which is HICP to measure inflation and to set our target. So that's that's good but we still believe that it's likely to be a bumpy road until the end of 2024, but we still have target at the end in the second half of 2025 on the basis of our projections and the baseline is unequivocal on that front. You are correct that services hasn't budged. So services is at 4. if I remember from the numbers that we got this morning. And obviously, we are very attentive to the components and what is behind services. And the real issue is to understand whether those are, this is caused by sort of permanent changes or whether it is also a factor of the lag effects of other components which are finding their way more slowly and gradually into services and the jury is out as to exactly what it is. The truth of the matter is that we do have a service number that has gone slightly up in the recent months and which is now staying at this 4.1 centric points. Now obviously we don't need to have services at 2% because manufacturing goods are below 2% and at the end of the day is going to be a balance between goods and services and it depends on the weight of those within the index. But we have to look really what is behind it and what's behind it is a lot of wages. Services has a very high component of labour. Wages also suffer from the lag impact of the labour system that we have in Europe where clearly bargaining agreement and negotiated not only on an annual basis in some country, but sometimes on a triennial basis in other countries. So you have this catch-up effect. You know, for those people whose renegotiation took place early this year, they had not had a negotiation of wages in the last three years. In the meantime, of course, inflation went up and their real wages went down. So there is an element of catch-up. So we need to really unpack all that to get to the root causes of inflation behind services. So we will continue to look at that. We need data. It applies to wages. It applies to profits, because we are seeing profit gradually declining compared to the height where they weren't at the end of 22. But we need to see those profits absorbing the wage cost increases to make sure that the second round effect is out of the window and services are also going to be on a declining path as well. Services is this is the difficult one. I was just going to pose that Taylor Swift is touring Europe this summer and there tends to be an inflationary effect in services. Am I right Chair Powell? We saw it last year didn't we? It's not just Taylor Swift you know others have come as well Larry Sprit, I don't know I saw her at Wembley and there was a lot of spending going on. No but how do you look at the services the stickiness of the services inflation and how tied it is to wages which have been rising? You know famously services inflation is stickier and famously it's tied to wages. I would say, so look at the U.S. labor market. We've seen a pretty substantial move toward better balance than we had a couple of years ago when labor was in, you know, extreme shortage. So what you see now is an unemployment rate that's moving back up toward a more sustainable level. You see wages moving, wage increases moving back down toward a sustainable level of wage increases, inflation and productivity, and you see vacancies to unemployment ratio coming back to where it was pre-pandemic and so many other measures I could mention. So that's what we're seeing. And so the labor market, wages, wage increases are still a bit above where they would wind up in equilibrium, but nonetheless, you can see the labor market is, you know, cooling off appropriately so, and we're watching it very carefully, but it doesn't look like that's, it doesn't look like it's heating up or presenting a big problem for inflation going forward. Indeed, it looks like it's doing just what you would want it to do, which is to cool off over time, not quickly, not suddenly, not steeply. It's kind of what we've been hoping to see and have been seeing. And services generally are, there's such a mixed bag, particularly non-housing services are a mixed bag. Some of what you're seeing is catch up inflation from inflationary pressures that happened earlier. You know with that's true with insurance. It's also true with housing services inflation where you've got some pent up rent increases that have to work their way off. It turns out it takes more than one year for that to have it take several years. So we see all that in train and you know we don't see ourselves getting back to 2% inflation this year or next year but it may be late next year but in the year after the main thing is we're making real progress. Is it can you keep cutting president a guard if he keeps holding? Does it make it harder? Well look you know I'm going to give you the conventional response because that's the conventional question you asked me. We do take into account the spillover impact of whatever is decided by other esteemed colleagues and obviously my esteemed friend, Chair Powell, is one of those. So we take that into account, but we also determine our monetary policy on the basis of what we see in our economy and and we look at the data that we get the impact that multiple factors have on our on our economies and and its numbers. It doesn't matter for you. President Kapos. What the Fed does next? Well, I think it matters to an extent, but I think there is one point that is worth making. and its numbers. It doesn't matter for you, President Karpas, what the Fed does next? Well, I think it matters to an extent, but I think there is one point that is worth mentioning, which is more recently we've seen a sell-off in some of the EM, and especially the EM that had more, there were like more the best cases for investment. And you see that this is being explained with local news. But when you have a lot of sell-offs in different markets, and they're all explained by local news, you have to ask yourself if there is a more fundamental factor driving that. And I think there might be. It's difficult to make the case right now, but definitely what we see now is there is more risk premium in a lot of the emerging market countries and it was very synchronized with the long end of the US curve and that correlation broke. So we've seen the last couple of weeks that even though the 10-year yield is more or less stable even actually going a little bit lower we saw a bit of a sell-off in a margin market countries and I think that has to do with the fact that as you go for longer, with higher rates and much higher debt, you start extracting liquidity from the market and eventually you are repricing that liquidity. It could just be a temporary adjustment in EM or it could be the beginning of a more profound movement. We need to wait and see. But I think the correlation between the US treasurer and some of the EM has been broken in the last couple of weeks. And I think we should pay attention to that. What about the fundamentals in emerging markets? Because the economies seem to do better during this hiking cycle than they have previously. Why do you think that is? And does it continue? I think most E.M.s did a better job in terms of, or at least an equal job in terms of anticipating of GDP facing the pandemic. A defense economy is spent a little bit more than 20. So I think there is also this thing which didn't happen in the past, which is buying large emerging markets were able to deal with the pandemic spending less. And actually, when you look at the fiscal post-pondemic, when the merger market continues to It's not the case of every country, but continues to do a little bit better. So I think that also makes change the dynamics. And one other thing is I think the independence of the central bank and the maturity that a lot of the central banks have gained in the emerging market,, proved to be very useful during this process of the pandemic. I mean a lot of your economies did better than expected with the with the interest rate hikes wouldn't it wouldn't you say Chairpal? Yes yes I think particularly yeah I mean many many forecasters had a recession for in 2003 which not only turned out to be wrong in the case of the US we had well in excess of 3% growth. So... But you still see policy as restrictive? Yes, we do. How restrictive? Well, so that's kind of an empirical question. So I guess I would say if you look at... We do think policies restrictive and we think that's appropriate. I think if you look at the labor market in particular, you're seeing demand for labor gradually come down in the form of job openings and now a slight softening and unemployment in the form of wages, you see demand coming in. Not just the supply that we're getting, but also demand coming down. You also see the effects of interest, high interest rates in the housing market and some other interest rate sensitive things. So you see that. and I think, you know, I do think that restrictive policy is working hand in hand with this broad supply side recovery we've had where we've seen the unwinding of the shortages and bottlenecks from the pandemic. We've also seen a recovery in labor force participation among prime age individuals in the US, and then some some immigration which has also been a positive supply shock. So we've seen all those things work together to give us you know really significant declines in inflation at the same time we've got a strong labor market and growth. This was a much it's a great outcome for the people that we serve and it's one that we want to do everything we can to foster. So why not just cut rates to protect it? It's what I said earlier. You know, we- Is it a bigger, sorry, I'll rephrase, is it a bigger risk that you cut prematurely and inflation stays sticky or that you wait too long and the economy loses more momentum? You know, that is the question. and so, and our answer to the, our answer to the question is you, we serve a dual mandate, right? And these two things are embodied in that mandate. You don't, the risk on, on the inflation side is that you move too quickly, inflation comes back, and we didn't really solve the problem. And then we have to go back in, and that would be, that would be very disruptive to the economy. So the other risk is that we wait too long. We understand that and the labor market softens too much. Perhaps we lose the expansion. So needless to say, we don't want to do that either. But at the same time, so we've got to balance those two. And again, given the strength we see in the US economy, we can approach that question carefully. But as I said earlier though, you see a year or so ago, we were talking about inflation, and our framework called for us to focus on the variable, the mandate that is further from its goal. They've come back much closer into balance. And a good way to see it is the beverage curve analysis that everybody talks about and looked at. We've come straight down the beverage curve, which you're really getting to that place relative to job openings and looked at. Looks at it. We've come straight down the beverage curve, which you're really getting to that place relative to job openings and hiring rates, where traditionally the beverage curve is flattened now, which would mean higher unemployment as a result of further declines in job opening. So you can't know that with precision, but it's very much understood by us that we have two-sided risks and we have to manage them. So what about the recovery in the Eurozone, President Lagarde? It's also been pretty resilient, especially on the unemployment front. How confident do you feel in sticking this off landing? Well, we reached a level of confidence back in June when we decided to actually cut rates by 25 basis points. But as I said in the opening remarks, it's not something that is taken for granted, that is a given, and we're going to re-examine each and every step of the way whether that confidence is actually continuously reinforced in order to continue on that path. And it's, I mean, the remarks by Chair Powell made me really reinforce my points about data because we are navigating in this universe of one risk versus the other, but where data is so important, and data is so important because we proceed always with the burden of the lag of time, whether it's the impact of our policy decisions, whether it's the impact of wages, whether it's the sort of on-time data or not, all of that has to be taken into account and analyzed in details so that we can feel really confident that we can go forward. At the same time there are also political risks. Certainly their front and center, it was nice of all the authorities to make elections all happen this week. Certainly in France and in England. President Lagarde, is there anything the ECB can do to shield the rest of the Eurozone from feeling any negative impact from a divided government in France or from whatever the result is of the French election in a negative way? I thank you so much for your question. It can't be a surprise because I'm not going to comment on the political situation of any of the member states particularly those that are facing elections at the moment but you know obviously the European Central Bank has to do what it has to do our mandate is price stability price stability is obviously relying on financial stability and we are attentive to that because this is part of our job and we will continue to do so. Does the rise in French bond yields look worrisome at all? These are the things that we monitor. This is part of the job. It's not particularly at this point in time. We do that all the time. And we are very attentive. You have fought hard for the central banks independence in Brazil and yet now you are the subject of many attacks from President Lula and so I'm wondering how you're dealing with that. Attacks for me? No, no. attacks from President Lula. I think he called you an adversary and an enemy. Yes, well, I think as a central banker, we have to get away from the political arena and try to go on with the technical job. And I think what we did, I think, is a living proof, that everything that was done was very technical. So during the elections in which Lula was elected, the incumbent president in his last year of mandate, we increased rates in a cycle that went from 2% to 13.75%. That's the biggest increase in rates in an election year in the history of any emerging markets. So if that is not a proof that you are independent and you acted autonomously, it's difficult to find another example like that. So I think all this narrative that the central bank has been political. I think we have to get away from that and explain what we are doing. And I think what we are doing has been very technical. The last decision was unanimous and we now have four members in the board that were chosen by the current president. And I think what we need to separate it was what is the political never achieve and what is the technical job that we need to do. And I think history will tell and time will tell that the job was done in the best we could do with the data that we had at hand and that was in the most technical way and that was done in a group of people that actually analyzed all the data and that worked very, very, judiciously to be able to get to the conclusions that we did. I apologize, you have any advice for him? You've been through some attacks from leaders. I have no advice. I will say though, to put it in my words, you know, we've been given this great responsibility and great powers, and really important that we get it right, and we've been told to stay out of politics and just do do your job do your job and that's what we do when we don't we don't try to get involved in issues that are not our issues and in particular we were just focused on our goals and getting through that and if we do that and do it well I will say in the United States there's very broad support for an independent Fed in both political parties on both sides of Capitol Hill and everywhere I don't I don't think that that's really a question as long as we just are seen to be doing our job and and staying on task at all times. Can I say something? Yes please. I think that there are countries where governors do exactly what Chair Powell said and yet get blamed, criticized, and I think that for some it takes courage to do the job in addition to being a good excellent technical expert. But I do wonder if you're concerned because your term ends, President Kompos, at the end of the year, and it doesn't seem like President Lila is going to reappoint you. So do you worry about the independence of the central bank? So first, I was never up for reappointment, regardless of who won the elections, and I've said that from the very beginning. When I helped design the independence law I actually try not to have the reappointment possibility in the law and for me the reason was I didn't want that the president of the Central Bank at any circumstance would have any incentives to bend his knee in order to have any kind of re-election so that we need to make that very clear. Secondly there is actually a risk premium down in the curve and I think it has being elevated in the last couple of weeks as to an uncertainty of what happens when the next leadership or the next team takes place. But this in Brazil is done very slowly because the center of the president can change two directors every year and we have eight directors plus the president. So right now we have four directors that were appointed by the current government. And the last decision, monetary decision, was unanimous. So I think what we did in the last decision proved that there was the group is very cohesive in trying to find the technical solution for the country So I understand there is a risk premium and there is always this uncertainty But I think the group that we have which is composed of eight directors plus a governor voted unanimously understanding that was the best for the country at that time. And so I think, I understand that there is a risk premium, but I think with time that risk premium will try, we tend to decrease. There are concerns in the United States about Fed independence. If President Trump gets elected, there have been reports that he's looking at that issue. Obviously you've been subject of attacks before. What is your level of concern about that? I am not focused on that at all and that's that's not just a talking point. I really think that we just keep doing our jobs. I mean the US economy we have 4% unemployment it's growing at 2% inflation is at 2.6% let's keep that going. Let's do our jobs. History will judge. I think if we can keep things on that path, that's what I'm focused on. That's the only thing I'm focused on. And as I mentioned, I do think support for the Fed's independence is very high, where it really matters on capital hill in both political parties among the leaders and most of the following. And so I worry about getting the job right. That's what I worry about. I know you guys don't want to touch politics, but President LeGard, it does bring into focus the fiscal policies. We heard President Campos say it. There are concerns about the deficits in France. If the far right should win, there are concerns in the United States about the deficits. So I do wonder if you have something to say or to warn or to warn on the fiscal front as it relates to making your inflation fight harder. Well fiscal matters enormously, true, and it matters in two different ways from my perspective. It matters from a sort of conjunctural type of way and thank goodness the European authorities have agreed on the the fiscal governance that will take over after the growth and stability pact has been replaced has been suspended and and now completely replaced so there is a framework within which members of the European Union have to operate have to control the direction of their debt, have to make sure that it is sustainable going forward through the efforts that they deploy and and have to keep their deficit on watch with enough flexibility and that's the second part of fiscal spending that I'm concerned about with sufficient of an impact on of a focus on productivity on growth of investment that will be conducive to both and my hope is that in addition to operating within the European fiscal framework which has been agreed by all European members in addition to that countries will actually look at the structural changes that they have to either continue to have in the arsenal of tools but also that they will continue to improve going forward because I regard that as critically important for productivity purposes which we are lagging behind and have been lagging behind for a long time. So we're not so worried about fiscal expectations as Roberto was saying for Brazil or emerging market economies but we're very concerned about the fiscal rules that have to be respected within the European Union and the structural reforms that will be conducive hopefully to productivity improvement going forward because that's the only way for Europe to actually remain strong and and you know thrive in those changing circumstances and transformations that we have talked about. I know I know you're allergic to fiscal policy Chair, but I have heard you talk about the unsustainable debt burden of the United States. And even lately, there's been a sell-off in treasuries after increasing odds that President Trump will be reelected, that there might be a sweep of either party. Doesn't that make you nervous when it comes to the progress you've had on inflation? If we do see more expansionary fiscal policy more deficit bigger deficits bigger debt loads so I'm gonna I'm gonna give you the traditional answer to some extent and that is that you know we just know fiscal policy is a job for elected people we're not elected people so we don't comment on, and particularly in advance of a presidential election. We're not commenting on anyone's particular policies one way or the other. I will say more broadly, though, the United States is running a very large deficit at a time when we're at full employment. And it just is, the level of debt that we have is not unsustainable. The path that we're on is unsustainable. That's completely non-controversial. I would have thought that this is something that should be a top level issue. And you do hear this from a lot of elected officials, but it should be a real focus going forward, is how do we get back to a sustainable path? Because you can't run these kinds of deficits in really in good good economic times for very long. I mean I wouldn't say I can't really speak to the time but in the longer run we'll have to do something sooner or later and sooner will be better than later. President Kompa? Yeah let's do a basic exercise. If you look at the total debt combined just sovereign that a few US plus Europe plus Japan, that's 64% of the total global debt. That went, in terms of cost of service, that it went from 1.1, 1.2% before the pandemic, to around 3.3% right now. But then you added 25% of GDP to that debt, which was the cost of facing the pandemic. So we have a much higher that and a much much higher cost of service, the debt. So I think there is an aspect globally that is the extraction of liquidity that commuilative will have an effect in the market that sometimes is not pricing correctly. And if you think about what we have to do right now, we have to pay for the cost of the transfer programs that we did. We need to pay for the cost of the green transition, which is somewhat expensive. We need to pay for the cost of the fragmentation, which you look at the surveys and it's very costly for companies and for governments. We need to pay for the cost of the low-income countries that spend very little during the pandemic and now we need support. We need to pay for the cost of demographics and there is a surge in consumption of energy that needs to be paid because of the innovation. So we have a lot of bills to pay. We have a lot of bills to pay. We are at the highest level of that we had had in a long time. And I think sometimes I stop and I think it's time for us globally to think about a way to get to some kind of stable trajectory of the debt in the next couple of years. And it's not one country or the other. It's something that we need to do collectively, because the global debt is very high, and is going to start taking a lot of liquidity a lot of liquidity from the other. It's something that we need to do collectively because the global debt is very high and is going to start taking a lot of liquidity from the markets. And the ones that will feel the effect are not advanced economies, are the emerging economies, emerging market economies, and the low-income countries are feeling that effect already. And you think the market is mispricing this risk? I think the market was mispricing a little bit, the fact that if you have higher rates for longer the effect from extracting liquidity depending on how much longer you're going to have these higher rates I think the risk is higher than what the market pricing is. I also wanted to ask you President Kompos about China because you have a pretty good view it's such a big trading partner for you. What's going on there? How much is China's economy slowing? I am not sure I'm very equipped to tell you to for you. What's going on there? How much is China's economy slowing? I'm not sure I'm very equipped to tell you what's happening in China. I can tell you that it's very important for a lot of emerging market economies. It's very important for Brazil. We are a very big exporter of food items and iron ore. So China is a very big trade partner with Brazil. and it has been for a while and independent, of the government is important to to understand that that is a very important type in Brazil. The one thing that we look from from looking from from far away is we're trying to see what are the policies that China is doing, where is it, what is the focus and what is the impact that these new policy will have for us. But because we sport mainly food items and iron ore, we don't see that as a big threat. I think some other countries will have a different a different understanding of what this impact will be. Yeah, I mean there's also trade barriers that are going up, President Lagarde, tariffs, I mean in our election we're talking about potentially more tariffs. Are you are you seeing that in terms of growth and inflationary impact? Well we're not seeing yet more tariffs than what had been decided back you know eight years ago and which was consistently maintained later on in relation to certain products. So that for the moment is stable. What is not stable at all is the number of protective measures. Occasionally noncompliance with WTO rules. The level of disputes that are brought before the WTO, which is not in a position to resolve them because they are not equipped with the dispute resolution mechanism and magistrates have not been appointed to that effect. We've had more than 3,000 trade protective measures decided in the last two years, and that is like five times what is the normal average of measures that are decided. So that's a concern and it's a concern because trade has been fueling growth and because Europe at large is not a small open economy it's a large open economy and trade restrictions are going to affect Europe much more so than other countries that operate without this degree of opening and vulnerability in a way. The second reason I'm concerned about it is that typically trade is conducive to innovation. Innovation is necessary for productivity. And I think that the combination of reduced trade on growth and the impact of trade on the capacity to innovate and to improve productivity is a vulnerability for Europe and one that we have to address very forcefully if we want to win this battle of productivity. So it's not independent from inflation. I'm not getting away from my topic but it's one that is clearly a concern on the horizon. But and it could be inflationary. I mean 10% across the board tariffs, Chair Powell, inflationary? Of course I'm not going to be scoring any potential political proposals which have been talked about. This is not our job to do that. Also almost anything affects the economy, trade affects the the economy, trade affects the economy, immigration, energy policy. Those are not our jobs. There are other agencies that do those jobs. We do maximum employment price stability. So in our in our political economy we we stay out of that. Right but but has implications for price stability surely and maximum employment. Again we're not we're not looking to, this is exactly what we're not looking to do, which is to become players on issues like tariffs. I mean, because it affects, I mean, literally everything, all these things affect inflation and jobs, but notwithstanding that, there are others in the elected government who are responsible for trade policy. We don't comment, that's all. Understood. So, back to your job then. There is this debate among the Fed and other central bankers about where policy rates are going, are starred, the neutral rate, what that rate should look like, and whether it's different after COVID. What do you think? Can we go back to trade? Sure. Please. So, Rstar. I guess I would start by saying that the thing that we write down as part of our summary of economic projections and the thing that economists mean by our stars is a longer run concept. It's it's the rate of interest that would hold the economy at equilibrium at a time when we're at stable prices and maximum employment and there are no shocks hitting the economy. So this is not the economy today. So the first thing to say is that when we're sitting in in the board room in Washington thinking about whether our policy rate is the appropriate rate for this economy for this economy for this economy for this economy for this is the appropriate rate for this economy right now. We're not battling over what long run R-star is because this is a different economy. This is an economy that's still recovering from the pandemic and so many forces are pushing it this way and that way and and there's really not a lot of precedence so it's a very challenging time but it's not that the question the R-star question is a really interesting question and that is are going to the very low levels of neutral rates that we had in the recovery of the global financial crisis or we are we going to go part of the way back from today's high rates to that and you know intuitively most people think that we won't go back to those very very low rates that we saw you know during the global financial crisis recovery period. But we don't really know. I mean, the neutral rate is moved around, we think, by slow moving, longer run forces, demographics, technology, productivity over time, all of those things move around. Ultimately, the balance between savings and investment. So it's a great conversation to have, but honestly honestly when we're looking at policy in the boardroom It's how is our how is our policy affecting today's economy and do we think we're getting the results that we want? And you know by and large in a world where this isn't a world of precision. We think we are. We're getting a gradually cooling economy, a gradually cooling labor market, progress on inflation, 4% unemployment, 2% growth. We're getting kind of what we would want to have. And so that's, and I worry that some people, no one in this room, but some people think that the R-star debate is the thing that dictates our assessment of how restrictive policy is. It's really not. Unless you think that the long run rate is the same as today's rate. I think that investors are trying to figure out though where you're going to end up and what the policy path looks like once you start cutting rates and it becomes important then. No I I agree it does. It's what will we what will we discover to be, we'll find it empirically, what will we discover it to be? And I think there's a debate going on. There are people who feel very strongly that it hasn't changed and that it has changed and ultimately it's unknowable. It does matter for the longer run. It matters for where rates all settle out, but it doesn't matter much for policy decisions today, which are the ones we're actually making. I guess we want to know if there are like 10 cuts coming or 15 cuts. I mean, do you think President Compos that's changed post-covid? Are you dealing with a different economy? So the art story for emerging market countries is a little bit different. So, for example, if you look at, if you had a table of countries of Latin America, you would find that at least the models internally used by their own central banks, in some cases you had Arts are going higher, like Brazil, from three to four and a half. But in some cases, you actually had Arts are going lower. So the question is, what is the short-term view, and what is the long-term view, as Chairman Jay described. And I think for us is more like trying to understand what is the structural reason for the neutral rate in Brazil to be so high, 4.5% real-time. It's really high. And I think a lot of it has a lot of structural elements from the past, but it has intensified during the pandemic. And you could go and talk about the amount of subsidized credit. You can talk about the transaction. elements from the past, but it has intensified during the pandemic. And you could go and talk about the amount of subsidized credit. You can talk about the trajectory of the debt. You can talk about productivity. For example, when you look at productivity, there is one thing that a lot of people talk about, which is in the need for raising money, sometimes the adjustment is done on the revenue side. When you do the adjustment on the revenue side, if you look at what's been done in emerging market countries, and even in some of the advanced economies, you tend to go back and tax capital more than labor. Because it's very hard to tax label coming out of a pandemic. If you tax more capital than labor, and this has already been happening for a while now globally, and especially in the emerging market, then you introduce another element that will bring productivity lower. So when you look at the causes of the of the new trade to be so high structurally, that's I think what we need to work on. And Brazil has done a lot of reforms. We have done reforms and I think if you compare to other EM countries, Brazil was actually able to do reforms in the middle of the pandemic, but still when you look at the efficiency of what was done, the end result seems to be that our structure rate is due to our neutral rate, our start is too too high and I think we need to go on and talk about whether the reforms are needed in the medium term to make sure that we have a structure rate and a neutral rate that is lower than we have right now. President Lagarde do you ever see a world where we get back to near zero interest rates absent a crisis? So I think we're heading towards that? That's my view at this point in time it's it's very unlikely but it's not something that I would want to pass judgment on. What I can tell you is that when we start having that conversation that Chair Powell described perfectly well and that I would completely subscribe to I would be relieved because it would mean that we are getting closer to where we need to be It would mean that we do not have any shock Suffered by the economy nor on the immediate horizon so that would be good news but we are certainly not at this stage and this is not the work that we do and we set our policies going forward. One thing that's been moving fast and has the potential to impact economies is generative AI and I know we started talking about it a little bit here on stage last year it was it was early but things have moved president President LeGuard. So how are you thinking about any impact on growth or productivity or inflation of what's happening in technology? Why, Sarah, that's a subject for which we need another hour. Because there are so many questions about it. Number one, there has to be some regulatory framework within which AI and generative AI in particular, especially if it's in the hands of a small oligopoly of companies, is actually organized in order to protect a number of rights and protection of citizens. I would start from that, which is not where we are for for the moment, although there are attempts to organize in a better way, as was the case with internet, on a global basis, the use of generality of AI. So point number one. Point number two, I will let Roberto talk to that point, because he's more of an expert than I am. The question of how much energy is used in order to test large language models is really something that is not often on the in discussion and yet it matters enormously. Third, the impact that AI will have on on growth, on inflation, on productivity I think is yet to be to be determined. I think most people would agree that it will have an impact throughout the ladder of jobs in most segments of the economy in areas where mechanical developments have not historically affected jobs in particular and it will require significant amount of training and constant upskilling of people so that they can adjust to artificial intelligence, use it and not be victims of it. I would add to that that I think we at the ECB are using artificial intelligence, try to do it in a safe environment without being hostage to those companies that would like to have access to the most private of our data. So it does require a cautious management and enough control without preventing the innovation and the creativity that people can apply in the use of these tools. You use it in models? How do you use it? We use it in models, we use it in, you know, whenever we need a lot of language mining and whether it's structured or unstructured data for that matter, we use it and we are constantly pushing the frontiers of that. But as I said cautiously because we need to protect data and we need to make sure that there is enough human judgment involved in the process of this use of artificial intelligence so that we are not either hostage to the mechanics itself. Do you think that fears over generative AI, Chair Powell, rendering certain jobs or industries absolute absolute are legit? And is there anything a central bank can do? I don't think we know. So you see this massive investment boom. You see serious people in the private sector and the public sector. There's a sense of something big coming here. And it feels like what that will be is it will eliminate some jobs, it will create some new jobs, and the question really is for many people who will augment their labor and make them more productive or will it eliminate their job? And I just don't think we know that. It's too early to say. There's not a lot of central bank can do about that. You know, this is really a job for, we can supervise our financial institutions and things like that to make sure that they understand what they're doing with all different kinds of technology. But also like everybody else, we're meeting with all the experts and asking ourselves what will be the effects on productivity, on inflation, on growth, and will it be enormously displacing, and if so, of whom? One thought is that it will be more people doing white collar jobs who are writing press releases and things like that. So we just don't know. It's something we're investing a lot of time and effort. We're not using generative AI. You know, we're very carefully looking at that. You know, other forms of earlier forms of AI are in fairly common use in American business and I believe we use some of that. What about you? I know you're focused on the energy needs as well. Well, first I think when you look at the surveys that we have and we have plenty now on the use of EI on companies. What you have in terms of empirical evidence up to date is that the companies that use EI to enhance existing labor have had better results than companies that have replaced labor for EI. So that's something that we know. It It doesn't mean that some jobs won't be replaced by others, as it was said. But I think what we need to understand is what we are seeing basically is an increase in the ability of processing data and storing data. So it's basically computer power and the ability to store data. And that's very energy consuming. You have a couple of dimensions that you need to look in, in order to privacy, where is the limit, and what is the taxonomy of using this? Once it becomes a global instrument, what is the taxonomy of using this? Because you could be talking about data centers being placed in countries that have cheap energy to produce services for countries that have more expensive energy. So once you start crossing the frontiers thinking about how you're going to do this movement globally I think there's a lot of consequences and one of which I think is you're going to have very unequal growth between the countries there are more on the edge of producing this technology in the countries that are more on the edge of producing this technology in the countries there are not and and the energy consumption also be very unequal. So I think globally we need to look at how we're going to connect the dots and create more or less a taxonomy for this development to be sustainable. In the minutes that we have left want to do sort of a quick lightning round of questions. Mainly, you know, we've been to, we've talked about opportunities, talked about economies. What about the biggest risk facing your economies? And I do wonder if they're the same or different. Chairpal, what's the biggest risk facing the U.S. economy right now? Yeah, I mean, I traditionally have said cyber risk to that because it's you know, it's just it's we know how to deal with credit risk, we know how to deal with lots of kinds of risk, you know market dysfunction, things like that, but we haven't really had a a big successful cyber attack on a financial market utility or a bank and that's the kind of thing which I think is, you know stuff of lying awake at night. I would also today though honestly really it is just the balance that we talked about getting the balance on monetary policy right during this critical period. That's that's really what what I think about in the wee hours. President Lagarde? Same thing. Really? Really? Cyber risk? I think you know I'm saying that touching wood actually and I wish yeah. Same thing. Really? Cyber risk? I think, you know, I'm saying that touching wood actually and I wish, yeah. Because it's one, if you ask, if you ask the financial sector, if you ask banks, with which we interact a lot sometimes much to the chagrin but eventually to the satisfaction in the long run I'm sure because we supervise them carefully but typically that's that's a risk that they they flag as one of their top priority risk and on which I think we need to constantly improve the level of coordination first second third line of defense and best way to respond to those now clearly I'm concerned as as a person more than as president of the ECB about the backlash that there is against the fight against climate change and some would argue that it has nothing to do with central banking but I would contend that this is actually not the case. It does have a ramification impact that we should be mindful that we is actually not the case it does have a ramification impact that we should be mindful about but it's it's a risk that that is there and that that will come to haunt us if we don't do much about it. I thought you were gonna say geopolitical risk. That's there too right? facing Europe? Geopolitical risks as defined by Moritzio earlier on? No who is it? Yeah Moritz. We heard a lot about geo-political progress. It's there and it's just on the doorstep of Europe. When you look at this horrible war against Ukraine, it's a major risk which is out there and which is hurting those on the ground and the neighbouring countries in particular. What's your biggest risk? If you look at what markets price today, they will probably, at least for part of Yemen, especially for Brazil, the conclusion would clearly be that the main risk is fiscal. But I think that comes in goals and it has to do with growth and productivity and a lot of the things. I think there is one other risk that I see and it's not very tangible, which is the polarization that we leave today. If we think about the amount of time that we spent on some social issues that are connected to polarization and they are not that meaningful to produce well-being of the society I worry a lot about that. Yeah so if we're sitting here on stage in one year from now, which we hopefully are, the inflation rate in the US will be... You know, mid to low two's? That's kind of... We're mid two's now. Yeah. Well, we have one month at 2.6. And you know, we had a brief visit to the low two's at the end of... I mean, I mean, sustainably, durably, underlying inflation, two and two and a half is what I would say. That would be a great outcome. Headline, PCE. Yeah. President Lagarde, one year from now? One year from now, I would say low twos. We are 2.5 latest reading, and as I said, bumpy on the way ahead. But yeah, low twos. You've been closer to 4% president compost right lately so where do you think you are in a year from now? Well I won't be in the central bank for a year from now. We already established that yeah but but I think that the work that's being done is very technical. I'm confident that we'll continue to be that way and I think when you look at expected inflation today I think it has a disconnect with the current inflation and it has a disconnect with the fundamentals that we have in Brazil. So I'm confident that the the future inflation will be lower than the expected inflation. In other words I I think what the market's pricing today is not in sync with the reality. What about the unemployment rate? We're going to go full dot plot here. Yeah. You know, I'd be happy if it were just right where it is now. That would be a good outcome. Plus or minus, a couple of tenths. Would be good. Is that likely? Yeah I think it's reasonable. Starting to rise. It's moved up from 3.4 we touched 3.4 so we're up to 4 but 4 still a very low level you know it's been a long time since if you take if you the last time we were at four or below for this long as you know it was I was a teenager a long time ago. Also unemployment rate in Europe it's been what healthy six and a half and a historical low and I Europe it's been what healthy six and a half historical low and I hope it stays there a year from now yeah what's the unemployment right in Brazil well it's close to seven percent now it's very low and when you look at our history I think probably we'll go up a little bit but not too much but I think what we need to look at at the participation rate so we just published a study that shows that the transfer programs have an impact in the participation rate. Our participation rate was down and then it's recovering a little bit at the margin. And I think it would be very important to understand what is the dynamics of the participation rate going further. And finally, Chair Powell, were you, were you a two-cut dot or a one-cut dot for 2024? No comment. Thank you very much. All of you. I tried. I tried. This brings us to the end of this special episode where ECB President Christine Lagarde, Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell and Governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, Roberto Compass Nito, discussed monetary policy in an era of transformation here at the ECB forum on central banking in Central Portugal. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Paul Gordon. If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review. And in the spirit of Europe, I'd like to end in Swedish and say, Hey Dor, until next time, thanks for listening.