 This year's ECB forum on central banking in Cintra Portugal took a look at monetary policy in an era of transformation. While a lot of the focus this year was on the challenges facing central banks such as high inflation and the impact of geopolitical uncertainty on monetary policy, we also took at issues facing the international financial system as a whole, and there are plenty, including financial stability in general, as high interest rates, pressure debtors, cross-border payments and climate change. So what's the outlook? You're listening to the ECB podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Paul Gordon. We tackled the issue of the International Financial System at CIN Central with an on-stage conversation between two people closely involved in the topic. They were class Knott who heads the Financial Stability Board, an international body that makes recommendations for the global financial system. Mr. Connott is also head of the Dutch Central Bank and therefore the ECB's governing council, and Lesitier Gangiagoo, the governor of the Reserve Bank of South Africa for the past 10 years and a key member of the Financial Stability Board. And here's what they had to say. If somebody had told me two and a half years ago that the global community of Central X was about to raise rates by roughly 500 basis points on average within a period of slightly more than 12 months and then would hold rates at that level for a significant period of time and the only true financial instabilities that we've seen so far is a set of second-tier US banks that were kept out of the international regulatory perimeter plus one significant Swiss institution, but an institution that already had a significant amount of governance-related issues that had nothing to do with the pivot in monetary policy. I would have immediately have signed up to it. Now, again, this is not a panel to be self-congratulatory and luckily we have Richard amongst us luckily we had the BIS this weekend reminding us that between the end of a hiking cycle and the first period in which financial instabilities can begin to manifest itself usually a bit more time needs to pass. So there are still lots and lots of financial instabilities or at least financial vulnerabilities in our parlance, financial vulnerabilities around there that we should worry about. And this is actually going to be the subject of the conversation that my good friend Les Lesetia and I are about to have. Now before we go into these financial vulnerabilities Lesetia, a lot of... that my good friend Lesotho and I are about to have. Now, before we go into these financial vulnerabilities, Lesothia, a lot of the discussion, of course, so far, has focused on ECB monetary policy in relation to the Fed and other central banks, but we haven't discussed so much the experience from South Africa and, let's say say the emerging market perspective. So how do you look at this issue of monetary policy synchronization versus monetary policy divergence from a South African perspective? Well maybe before I could talk about the South African perspective just want to take this a little bit further because the divergence that you have seen is not just in advanced economies. You have also seen divergence in imaging market economies. But also imaging market economies felt much better than in previous episodes. And what had been the distinguishing factor? What made the imaging markets resilience first had been the distinguishing factor and what made the the emerging markets resilience fast had been the issue of policy frameworks. inflation targeting does work and in countries that had implemented inflation targeting flexibly and more robustly they had been able to fare much better. And I think that it is that that explained why imaging markets were the first ones to start tightening monetary policy before advanced economies work. If you are an emerging market central bank, you are used to volatility of output and inflation. And when you see inflation beginning to rise, you know it is coming. You have to run surveys and try to impute these things from market expectations. Bottom line is that once the public starts talking about the high cost of living you know that inflation has become a problem and what has become also useful had been a public global public survey that was done by a serving company. That actually established that the public has become increasingly intolerable of inflation. But something happened in South Africa that I never thought would happen before, which happened in 2022, where there was a public demonstration against the high cost of living. Interestingly, that public demonstration didn't come to the central bank. It went to the presidency. I almost wanted to say wrong address. You should have come here, and then I would have shown you what to do, what to do with that. A second point had been that the divergence in imaging markets has not just been about the stance of monetary policy. It also had to do with the policy experience. Those who had bad policies fed really bad during this episode and those who didn't have buffers actually suffered and unfortunately those who do not have buffers, actually suffered and unfortunately those who do not have buffers, and unfortunately those who do not have suffered and unfortunately those who do not have buffers, and unfortunately those who didn't have buffers actually suffered and unfortunately those who do not have buffers even if they had good policies They suffered but it had to do in the main because these were really developing a countries and low-income countries the third point that I think, the resilience had been that the US response to this episode was also good. You might say that they acted late, but when they acted, they acted resolutely, which meant that global inflation picked at lower rates compared to what we saw in the 70s, but also policy didn't have to tighten as much as it happened in the 70s and as such didn't quite experience a utilization. And the last point class that I would like to make, since we are focused on financial stability, I say to my chaps in the Financial Stability Department, I pay you for one thing. So don't come here and tell me things are okay. Tell me what to worry about. So I'm trying to find something that I could worry about, and I asked them, what should I worry about? And the one thing that had come class is what could actually go wrong and the question that then comes to me had to do with the levels of debt and the trajectory that the debt could follow. Put it into context. The OECD Global Debt Report states that debt in OECD market debt in OECD countries in 2024 will rise to 56 trillion dollars. If you take that back to 2008 it's an increase of 30 trillion dollars. Of that debt, 40% is maturing within the next three years, and that is sovereign debt. Copyright debt, 37% of that is maturing within the next three years. So whether it is repaid or it is refinance, and I think most likely to refinance, is going to be refinance at rates that are higher than what that debt was raised. And that could raise potential issues. And my question to you, last, with you being the chair of the Financial Stability Board, but also being the governor of a central bank in the Euro system, is to what extent you are concerned about the financial stability risks that could emanate from this elevated debt situation and the trajectory that it follows. Well, Lesetta, let me begin by saying that obviously the risk of high indebtedness is clearly not a risk that is restricted to emerging markets only. We've seen an episode in the UK related to a very rapid repricing of a public debt trajectory in an advanced economy. There is no escaping from the notion also at the lunch conversations etc that the issue of fiscal policy and sovereign debt is back on on many people's radars. It is indeed true that countries differ very much in terms of the average maturity of borrowing fixed-rate versus flexible rate borrowing. So the day of the reckoning can be postponed by having a lot of fixed rate borrowing, but if the inflation outlook is such that the rates will continue to have to be high for an elevated period of time, then of course at some point that will rollover risk will manifest itself, and I think there is still quite some rollover risk in the pipeline here. Now you mentioned high indebtedness this is of course not the only financial stability vulnerability that we worry about. By the way in our parlance we talk about financial stability risk as being the confluence of shocks which we cannot predict because we don't know where they come from and vulnerabilities which we can actually manage and try to remedy. Although financial vulnerabilities that I could think about are of course to do with the still quite rich valuations in financial markets and the question that that comes to mind there is for instance is a risk like geopolitical risk the risk of geoeconomic fragmentation is that risk sufficiently priceable by markets have markets that taken that risk sufficiently into account suppose that were to give rise to correction what would then happen with the let's say the non-bank financial system so far the core of the financial, the non-bank financial system. So far, the core of the financial system, the banking sector, has managed relatively well. In part, I will say, because of the financial reform agenda that we rolled out after the global financial crisis, but there is a host of issue in the non-bank sector which is different from the banking sector because it's not so much about capital but it is about liquidity mismatches and definitely if they are combined also with forms of hidden leverage popping up. So that's a vulnerability that I would ask attention for and of course geopolitical risk also leads to more active let's say cyber risks more involvement of state actors in in cyber attacks and then of course there is also the issue what does it do with capital flows? You are a representative of an emerging market so to what extent can these vulnerabilities also give rise to more volatile capital flows? And that would be my question to you, Lesetteja, from an emerging market perspective. Do you worry about NBI and capital flows? You know I was about to interject you last and come back to one thing. Because we keep on giving the child a new name. You know, this thing was, we were worried about shadow banking, then we said, no, maybe it's not quite shadow banking, is bank-like financial institutions, then we said, no, no, maybe that's not quite the term. Let's call it market-based financing, and then now we're calling it the MBFI. You know, it's the same child, okay? It's just having different names all the time. And the thing for me, when you say, are you worried about capital flows, I ask myself, because, you you see I spent a lot of time going to key world financial centers to try and get investors to put their money in the South African economy whether it is in the bond market and in the equity market. Then I come to a conference like this last and then you tell me about the dangers of capital flows. Then I ask myself which part of my job is bad now because I have to go around trying to get capital to come to my country only for me to come to the meeting to tell me that capital flows are so bad they might actually lead to financial financial instability. But point here is that capital flows are easier to manage if you have robust policy framework such that capital goes into the areas where it is supposed to be. Let me give you the South African example. So in the 2000s in the build up to the great financial crisis, the bulk of capital flows that were coming into South Africa were non-debt creating flows, going into the equity market because they were looking for growth and they were all some of them were looking for infrastructure. We got into the period after 2009 a period in South Africa that we characterized as state capture where bad policies started to set in and the nature of the flows changed and they tended to be more dead creating flows and they tended to be more dead creating flows and they tended to go to state-owned enterprises which almost turned out to be zombies and government had to bail them out. So the point that I'd wanted to drive to is with a prudent macro policy framework, rule of law, functioning institutions, and so forth, capital flows would be good. Capital flows can reverse, but they reverse because of the nature of global finance. If they are concerned about risks, capital will flow away from the risk and go to where either risk is low or returns are better. And so that is what you would actually be actually faced with. So to the extent that there would be countries that are worried about capital flows, it would be that, well, maybe we know the policies are bad and capital might just flow out because if the policies are good this thing seems to me men revating and so capital would flow out and it would flow back in and our experience had been to allow the exchange rate to take this shock on behalf of the economy so when capital flows out the exchange rates depreciate, and when they return, the exchange rates, they appreciate. But it becomes also particularly important for us when this becomes a shop absorber, because most of the major emerging markets now do not suffer from what Ricardo Haussman called the original sin. These flows tend to be denominated in domestic currency. So when there is an outflow the investors would know that if they have just moved out out of panic not because the policy have changed there is a price to pay because those who stay behind gets to experience better returns. Well in that sense Lesettea let me remind you also that the fact that we moved away from the word shadow banking was exactly sort of to underline that this word perhaps had a little bit too much a negative connotation so there is nothing wrong with sort of market-based finance in that sense that's why we tried to move away from a more neutral term well non, non-bank financial intermediation. It's not the greatest of all terms, but at least it was meant to illustrate that actually there's nothing wrong with capital market finance in and of itself. On the contrary, I think with my European head on I would say we could use a little bit more capital market financing rather than this heavily bank dominated financial system that we currently that we currently have. But it is interesting that the concept of resilience of course in in the MBFI space is a different concept than the one in the banking sector. In the banking sector it's much more focused on buffers, on capital within the core institution. Within the MBFI space this is much more heterogeneous. It's about liquidity imbalances, it's about managing such liquidity imbalances. It is about strengthening the core players like investment funds, money market funds, etc. but it's definitely also about some cross-cutting issues like liquidity preparedness for margin and collateral calls. We saw a lot of that in March 2020. It is about pockets of hidden leverage, think about the Archego's case that manifested itself. So it's much more diverse. It's much more about sort of making sure that the markets are be brought in a position where they can price the risk accordingly rather than focusing solely on the entities. Now the trick- That's a very important point. But this is- you talk about this- so we talk about this flows. One of the things that we established is the following. South Africa is very far from Ukraine, and yet when Russia invaded Ukraine, capital flew out of South Africa, it flowed out of other imaging markets. So clearly now the issue of the geopolitics and geo-fragmentation plays a issue. It becomes a challenge. How do you think about geo-fragmentation and how you think it could be impacting on this area of work? Well actually I think geoeconomic fragmentation has of course real effects on trade and on impeding technology diffusion which has a negative effect on productivity growth on either side of the fence but if I take it more into the financial stability area the biggest drawback I see from geoeconomic fragmentation is that most of the challenges that we are being faced with the of the let's say financial vulnerabilities are truly global in nature and can only be remedied with a global approach with a global cooperative approach where everybody is willing to play his or her role. That is the reason why the FSB was established. That was also the reason why the Financial Stability Board in 2009 became a G20 committee. Its foreigner was the Financial Stability Forum, which was a G7 plus forum. The Financial Stability Board is a G20 plus institution, and that was meant to reflect that the challenges that we face are truly global in nature. Think about climate. Think about crypto. and that was meant to reflect that the challenges that we face are truly global in nature. Think about climate, think about crypto. Another reason to worry a little bit, I think, is that when it comes to crisis management, imagine that we would have another global financial crisis 2007-2008. We all remember at the Pittsburgh 2009 summit where sort of countries came together and agreed on a globally concerted sort of policy response. Would it be possible in today's world to come up with a similar response if a crisis like that were to repeat itself or would we first enter into a phase of recriminations, of mistrust, etc. So the potential and the lower potential for international cooperation, that for me is the largest financial stability risk that I see emanating from this geopolitical and geoeconomic fragmentation? Now this is very much from the FSB's perspective but as you are well aware you will be you as South Africa will be taken over the G20 presidency next year and my observation is that this is actually also to some extent hampering the effectiveness of the G20. So do you have any plans already in let's say in shape for next year how you want to go about this when you have to chair the G20? Well T20 for thanks why 20 for you the W20 for women L20 for labour ministers 20-20-20-20-20 this is becoming a big industry. And so we want about this that what you have is that the G20 agenda keeps on adding up. Nothing gets dropped. The stuff that the G20 was found to deal with, we still have to deal with those. And yet, there is more and more added on to on to the agenda and just thinking about the South African agenda as we go in into the into the 2025 we look at this and I look back and you know I did this as a young civil servant but if the work of the G20 is going to be reduced to negotiating a communique we have a problem. We are not dealing with global issues that are confronting us and any country could find one paragraph in the communique that they do not like and we will have no communicate. So why travel? Why travel for 16 and half hours to listen to people argue about one paragraph and then eventually decide okay chairman you can go and make your own statement. Well you could just well just said at just said at home and asked the chairman to make it a statement, right? But we are reducing the G20 to a communique thing. Can we look back and say that What is the agenda of the G20 and obviously this thing has been elevated to the heads of state? I am that is above my pay grade. so whatever I'm going to be telling you is what we are trying to do with the finance track which I'm coming to think of it, that the FSB's value aid was having the treasuries in the room, the central banks in the room, the regulators in the room, the regulators in the room, the regulators in the room, and I'm afraid that the treasuries, apart from the ministers, below the treasuries are starting to drop their level of participation in the FSB because that is the work the finance track has really migrated to the FSB and if the G20 was to look back and say what are the achievement of the G20 since the global financial crisis you will find that it is the finance track the regulatory reform agenda that is what that is what now that we talked about the debt I I mean, the debt distress now in low income countries, it is a concern. The G20 common framework sounded great in design. It is too slow. It is not quite working for the countries that are in distress. And it doesn't take into account that there is a lack of capacity in many of those low-income countries to successfully negotiate with well-resourced creditors and maybe what we should be thinking about is who is the broker that could come in into the into the room. The IMF tried before there was a pushback, but maybe we could get the IMF to work then on the side of the countries, rather, and help the countries to be able to prepare themselves into that. The second part of the finance track, which is important for us, this is the first time that an African country would be cheering the G20 at a leaders summit and one of the things that we established had been that the African continent corridors of remittances are among the most expensive around and we're going to be spending time on not adding new things to the payment agenda because I co-chair the CPC in the FSB just to lift that agenda and and to take it to the next level we have set targets for 2027 and for 2030 we have only had two years now I don't think that we should be despondent because we spent the time sorting out the measures. targets for 2027 and for 2030 we have only had two years now I don't think that we should be despondent because we spend the time sorting out the measures and so forth and that that is the work that we would like to we would like to to take forth and lastly is that because work of the like it almost migrated to the FSB is almost you guys can talk about those in the FSB, here we would like to deal with other things and to just make sure that the FSB continues to play a meaningful role in the G20 agenda. But just proceeding on this global payments roadmap which I believe is absolutely crucial and is very very very essential. At the same time South Africa is also part of the bricks you know the famous abbreviation and what we are reading in the press is that actually and here I think geo-economic geopolitical fragmentation and payments sort of come together that the bricks are thinking about setting up their own payment system. So my question to you would be how does that relate to this this work in the G20 where we try to combine a fast payment system where we try to work on global interoperability and at the same time building these these separate structures can these two be sort of reconciled? Well if you if you if you doubted whether sanctions work and this is it it might have worked in the wrong direction but they work right so so so so finance has been so to say weaponized and you're cutting people out of key systems they will find alternatives I do not think that the economics makes sense but when you start to say to people you are going to be cut out of global finance people will create a different environment. And we must think carefully about whether this is an instrument we wanted and we wanted to use. I got worried when I had to speak to some reserve managers and they were talking about, oh, reserves can be seized. We better start looking elsewhere. Let's look at alternative markets. Let's look at different custodianship, and so forth. We are going to have a fragmentation. Does that mean that we should not be working towards a framework that would enable all of us to get, absolutely not. We should continue the work because it is those of us who are on the fringes of the global financial system who will end up paying the price for the fragmentation. Excellent. So I think this was a very good example of how you see that yeah, geopolitical risks are actually interfering with the work of a global platform like the Financial Stability Board. I could add just one more area before I think we should also draw in a little bit of the audience and that of course has to do with digital currencies and particularly crypto currencies. That's an older area where in today's world I believe you can take a server under your arm to any place in the world you plug into the internet and you can start issuing crypto assets. So the FSB has come forward with two sets of recommendations. One set of recommendations for a global regulatory framework for crypto assets and crypto asset activities and another one for global stable coin arrangements. But of course the strength of these recommendations will only be decided by the scope of its implementation. If we allow non-cooperative jurisdictions to continue to function and attract these crypto asset activity, then probably we will not be able to deliver on the goals that we've said ourselves in this area. And I think this is one more area where we have to make sure that whatever is happening in the world, that we try to find each other at the FSB table, and that we come to a common understanding, that we have enough information sharing across countries, because in many of the emerging markets you are well aware of the concerns that for instance US dollar denominated global stable stable coins would take over part of the payment system in these countries. That's I think a concern that we should take very seriously. And then a final example where I think global cooperation is absolutely key and that has to do with climate change. There is only one global climate and in that extent to that extent I also wanted to ask you let's say because South Africa is a little bit in a peculiar position when it comes to climate change. On the one hand you stand to suffer quite a bit from climate change, yeah, rising temperatures, drawed, floods, etc. At the same time, your energy mix is still heavily dominated by coal. There are issues with energy outages in the country, etc. How do you sort of navigate between these two challenges? It's the same, the only reason we have economists is to help us deal with trade-offs and otherwise we do not need economists, okay? So we face the trade-offs and some of these trade-offs are inter-temporal and so we have, we have, as you correctly pointed out, an energy system that is very much based on code. stations that are fired by coal. In the medium to long term, we are making the transition. Our just energy transition plan is well thought out and we think that it would be. And this short-term trade-offs are very important and since we are in Europe. So when Russia invaded Ukraine, what happened? You were going to face a cold winter. And what did? I didn't even hear the narrative change. All that I saw was that the parts of South Africa were very busy carrying coal to Europe. It was correct because you couldn't say to Europe its transition from hydrocarbons at all costs. You were facing a situation where you needed energy now. And you had to get that coal. That is exactly the challenge that we face in South Africa. We are facing an energy shortage, and we have got a resource coal coal. And so to the extent that we are not building new coal-fired coal-fired power stations, we are just getting the existing ones to continue to work. We are making this transition, give you this perspective. In 2022, we generated 2.3 gigawatts of renewable energy. three gigawatts of renewable energy. By 2024, we are generating 5.9 gigawatts of renewable energy. Our national energy regulator says that the projects currently underway will add another nine gigawatts to the grid. So the transition is taking place. And part of it to do with the fact that we were facing the constraint energy situation and yet the fastest way to deal with it was to actually bring in renewables, I wouldn't say that, because we have, it's, wait, who do have wind, but in the main is solar. I won't say to the UK that they must do solar. I'm sure they can do it and it would work. But we have got like 350 days of sunlight, right? So it's a competitive advantage. So we can, we can, we we can do that and that is the transition that we are making excellent so there is still some time left for questions for I think we touched upon a very very wide raise of subjects but any questions you may have on let's say global financial stability related matters who wants to take the floor? Well, Richard, please. Yes, we take a couple of questions and then if there are more, please raise your hand. Yes, Harold. Okay, Richard. I'll just start with a remark on one of the initial statements that was made about who's responsible for inflation. Well, I'll tell you, when inflation is going up is the central bank. When it's coming down, it's the government. That's what we found out in the United Kingdom. That's the part of the story that's been told in our election campaign. Anyway, I'll pass on to the real issues, which are macroprudential. And two points. One, I'd ask you, we're talking about volatility of capital flows and to some extent the role of non-bank financial intermediaries. Is there in your view, both of you, is there a role, should there be a role for capital controls as part of the macro-pro-proo armory. And the second issue is on global payments and I'll put that together with Klaus's remarks about crypto. I would be concerned that the stable coins could become a significant vehicle for international transfers that would be really outside the outside the domain outside the control outside the regulatory perimeter and is that something that worries you? Excellent. The gentleman over here. This was wonderful. Thank you. I want to ask you, if we didn't already have this language of advanced economies and emerging markets, do you think we'd have the current grouping of countries into these groups? And if we were trying to do this how would you define an emerging market in terms of policy terms what is it that makes these countries different from advanced economies? Excellent question thank you. Governor Conago, you spoke about the webinization of the financial system and I very much agree with that perspective and how that's going to potentially change the financial system in the future. I'm hoping you can elaborate a little bit more on that and in that context, maybe also, when we get back at the crypto question that Richard Porter has raised, I mean, some countries view crypto as an opportunity as rather than a danger right because it offers an alternative to the controllable financial system and we have seen what happens with control of the financial system. It's how I do I stright not very successfully but is this an option for South Africa or what you stand on that? Maybe you would go and then I'll pick up the pieces where you're leaving. Well I wanted you to pick up the crypto and the global stable coins and then since there was a specific question about South Africa I'll come on that and I thought that I will take the other two. Advanced economies, imaging market economies, you know, I go through the data and I found that the IMF and the World Bank has this language, low-income, middle-income, upper-middle-middle income. And at the end of the day, for me, it is I'd look at our country and say, where are we relative to other countries in the world? And if the other countries are ahead of us, then we are developing and we have got to be to try and see whether we are going to catch up with that. I just hope wish one day there would be an egalitarian world and we wouldn't talk about developed and developing because we will all look so much alike, but that is not going to happen in our lifetime, it looks like. Rule of capital controls. Let me say this, that sometimes an illogical about it. You want access to other people's savings, but you don't want them to have access to your access to yours. Let me say this, that sometimes an illogic about it. You want access to other people's savings, but you don't want them to have access to yours. It's like a different kind of protectionism. Now, we have in South Africa, we are stupid enough to call them exchange controls because there are people who are clever around the world who call them capital flow measures and and for a long time we had this and the idea whole idea was that a party in South Africa believed it wanted to create a laga and insulate itself from the rest of the world so you want it wanted to capture all the capital there. With democracy we said we want to open up and we were opening up and at some stage in 1998 we actually got advice from the IMF that said that we think you are moving too fast in your liberalization can you please slow down and eventually by the 2000s what we said we would do is to reform so that we are in compliance with the OECD code on capital liberalization and that is the approach that we have taken. Can this be used for macroprudential? It's something that exists in the toolkit. Like many macroprudential tools, I don't think efficacy has been tested, and in a way it could also be dangerous, because at the time that you decide to put the capital flow measures, the interpretation of capital could be, you know something they don't know, and they panic even more. And then you might just find that you actually make the problem worse than it which have otherwise had been. But they are there. They are a tool that countries could use. They should be used judiciously. Okay, let me pick up the question Richard, you raised on cryptos and payments. Within the FSB, if we look at financial innovations, we always have this overarching frame that we want to harness the benefits while mitigating the risks. Now, if you apply that phrase to the crypto area, there is a legitimate question still out there. What actually are the benefits to society of a lot of the crypto assets, global stable coin activities? If you take the three functions that we have of money, none of them currently satisfies these three roles of money. But at the same time, what we see is of course there is a strong investor demand for crypto assets. There is no global agreement to ban cryptos, let alone if there was an agreement whether we could operationalize such a ban. So the emphasis from the Financial Stability perspectives has come from let's say two things. First of all, to the extent that deficiencies in our traditional global cross-border payments world where were one of the sources of this crypto space to flourish, we should address these weaknesses. That's the reason why we have this global cross-border payments agenda, a G20 agenda again that you together with Fabio Panetta from Baca Nitalia that you coordinate within the FSB. And the other one is to try to come up with an as convincing as possible global framework of regulating crypto asset activities and global stable coins. Regulating the well-known risks in this space like AML, CFT, like insufficient separation of funds, intransparent governance, has structures in these crypto conglomerates, etc. There is a host of very traditional investor protection issues that also play a role in this area and that we have tried to capture as much as we can. Actually Andrew has been leading this exercise within one of the standing committees of the Financial Stability Board to come up with a set of workable standards to mitigate this risk as much as possible. But then again let me conclude by saying its effectiveness will depend entirely on the preparedness of individual jurisdictions to implement and to collectively also think about a regime how to deal with non-cooperative jurisdictions because at the end of the day I repeat myself you can take your server under your arm to any place in the world where you can start up these activities and that the jury is simply still out as to how effective we will be here. Good, there is still one minute left, so at least one more question. Maybe we have a few minutes to run over. Yes, to the left, the question for the governor of South Africa. I was really interested in your comment that inflation targeting works because over so much of my career there's always been this perennial sort of challenge to the framework after the GFC, you know, what about asset bubbles, and then when we were in this period of below target inflation that maybe we should change elements of the framework. And again, more recently, people talking about raising the target or putting a band, et cetera. We haven't talked much about it today, but just really interested to hear about from your perspective, what do you think are some of the lessons for the DM economies? You know, we maybe shouldn't be throwing away the inflation targeting framework just yet. Is DM developed markets or is it... this concept moves a lot. I will paraphrase one political scientist who said that if you thought democracy is bad, try the alternative. And I will put this and say that if inflation targeting framework is not working, what is an alternative monetary policy framework? We have come a long way in developing countries we had had countries that would have exchange rate packs. monetary policy, which basically meant that the governor could justify moving race and there was a time when countries were pursuing money supply targets and in my own country we had a framework that was called an eclectic monetary policy which basically meant that the that the governor could be called an eclectic monetary policy which basically meant that the governor could justify moving race at will because they just pick up which indicator says if you look at this indicator therefore that was problematic and I think that the lesson of the inflation targeting framework is that it is clear you have got an anchor and if you have an independent central bank to execute that framework even better and just understand that the other flip side of independence is transparency and accountability because that is how you sustain the framework. And I think that we should not piece too defensive either. We should allow society, if in a democracy, if people want to question the framework, we must engage with that because I don't know, maybe there might be an alternative. So far all the alternatives that have been put on the table have not been credible and and so this is the framework that actually works and now and then I think that a number of central bank from the ECB to the BOE to the Fed have had revisions they tweaked the frameworks to make sure that the framework is more robust and apart from that I am not sure that I can help you. Thank you very much. I think this concludes today's discussion. I had no doubt that we would have more than enough ground to cover, and indeed there is still, I think, a whole array of issues that we didn't touch upon. But nonetheless, thank you very much for being with me here. Thank you very much for being with me here. Thank you very much for being with us. And that concludes also this session. Thanks. Thank you. That brings us to the end of this episode where we were listening to class Knott, head of the Financial Stability Board, as well as the Dutch Central Bank, and the Cetiétea Caniago who is the governor of the Reserve Bank of South Africa. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Paul Gordon. If you like what you've heard please subscribe and leave us a review and in the spirit of Europe I'd like to end in Romanian and say La Revidere. Until next time, thanks for listening.