(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

What do you want to be when you grow up? This is a question that most of us were asked as children, and many of us, myself included, had no idea how to answer. But I'm sure that as children, and even now as adults, you cannot know all the career options available to you. Teacher, doctor, policeman, we know, but what about banking supervisor? Today, in our second episode of the ECB Podcast Summer School, we want to jump into a day in the life of a banking supervisor, so the people who make sure that our banks stay safe.

What does their work look like? What are the challenges? You're listening to the ECB Podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Stefania Secola. Today, I'm very happy to welcome Ramon Quintana Aguirre, Director General of Systemic and International Banks. 

Ramon, welcome to the podcast. Thank you very much. Thank you. 

You join us today in part two of our summer school series on banking supervision. And you joined the ECB Banking Supervision in 2014, so you've been there since the beginning and have been leading several departments ever since. So, Ramon, we rely a lot on your experience and knowledge today. 

And in our first summer school episode with Elizabeth McCall, we talked about what banking supervision is and why it's important. For our listeners, you can find the link to the first episode in the show notes. But today we want to get more into the people behind banking supervision and what they do to keep our bank accounts safe. 

To dive in, let's discuss how you got into banking supervision. Can you tell us what are the typical qualifications and experiences in this role? Okay. Thank you very much, Stephanie. 

It's very nice to be with you. I think I came into banking supervision a little bit by chance, like many things in your life, your partners, your friends. I studied business administration. 

I come from Bilbao, a very nice city in the north of Spain. I'm Basque. And I didn't know what to do after finishing my studies.

So a friend of mine told me that he was catering for becoming an inspector at the Banco de España. You had to go through an exam. You had to study hard. 

They only got the top people. And so I did it. I went to Madrid and I had the chance of passing the exam. 

I've been a line supervisor for 38 years already. And I've never got bored. I always felt it's a challenge. 

Banks are not just buildings, are about people. And this work is about working in a team. I really enjoy the personal dimension. 

I think in terms of deep diving more into qualifications, I think that banks are so diverse. That is very much about business administration. It can be engineers. 

The mathematical part also matters. It can be lawyers. It can be mathematicians. 

Very wide. So very, very, very, very, very wide. In terms of experience, when we recruit people, it's very much work experience in the financial sector, in accounting firms, in auditing firms, in consultancy firms. 

So very, very broad. And I would highlight the people dimension. That's what I love of this job. 

It's not just sitting at your desk and being alone. You contribute to a team and you engage with people. And that is very, very relevant. 

And you have to be curious. Ah, tell us about it. Curiosity is essential. 

So banks are so large, so big. And you are so humble. You supervise, if it's a large bank, a business with 150,000 people. 

So you have to be focused and you have to be curious by nature because otherwise you won't be successful, in my opinion. So trying to learn all the time. Yeah, yeah. 

So apart from the qualifications, I think it's interesting to know a bit more about the job itself. So what do supervisors actually do and how does supervision work in practice? What do we do? So we look at banks. We care about them being safe, sustainable. 

They take deposits. They drive those deposits to the economy through loans and they play a very important role. So banks have to be perceived as safe. 

And that's our job. But by doing so, we ensure financial stability in a way because in the end, if banks are safe, individual banks are safe, the whole system is safe. We have a particular, in my view, a particular job or relevancy because we supervise 110 institutions, the significant institutions in 21 countries, 27 trillion of total assets. 

So I would say that with the Fed and with we are the most important supervisor in the world, at least in the Western world. 27 trillion. Wow. 

Yeah. So that is huge. Twice the European GDP. 

So that gives you the sense of how relevant all this. What do we care about? In simple terms, it's easy. We bank a bank to be profitable. 

We want a bank to be well capitalized with a proper liquidity, managing risks in an adequate manner with a good governance, diversity of mindset, skills and so on. Very easy, right? Yes. On paper. 

On paper, but not so easy to achieve. They compete with each other. And this means that inevitably you have strong banks and you also have weak banks and how to address the weak banks is part of our job. 

No, it's essential. We try to reduce the probability of default of a bank. It cannot go to zero, but it's that's our job. 

No, it's I like to think it's not such a well-known job because when we are successful, nobody knows the efforts that we do. When something goes wrong, everyone knows. And we are in the media. 

We are challenged, rightly so. So it's sometimes it's frustrating because it's only about a failure. No, you're never in the media if you've done the job well.

So it's important for you to know that and the community know that you belong also to know all our efforts. I think another relevant feature is that we are interconnected in the European supervisory mechanism. So it's not only about the ECB. 

It's about the ECB and all the national competent authorities and national central banks or 21 of them. In fact, they are more than us. So we are around 100,000 people. 

They are more than 3000. That's also a part that I really like. It's about, again, interacting with other people.

In this case, they come from other authorities and we have to work together. So how do we do this job? There are different components. One is what we call the joint supervisory teams that supervise these 110 institutions. 

I belong to one of them. And these are people that the job is to look on a daily basis to the banks to ensure what I said before, that they have a sound strategy, a sound business model, that they run risks properly. They have to look at individual risks, credit risk, market risk, operational risk, and so on, and how they deploy controls. 

They propose the onsite work that we have to do. So they are the cornerstone of our supervisory mechanism. And so they do this job, as you can imagine, across interaction with banks. 

So looking at all the documentation, starting from the board, from the different risk committees, and the daily information about how they manage risks, we have to engage with the management body. So as I said, the boards, we have to come with their own conclusions in terms of assessments of how they do their job, and which are their main shortcomings in terms particularly of how they manage risks. It can be a too high risk level.

It can be weaknesses in controls. And we have to come with our proposals to reduce, mitigate those risks. We are the authority, so we can do that. 

We require, we recommend, we follow up, and the banks have to deliver. In addition, according to regulation, and very much connected to how the risk profile is, we can request more capital than the normal one. And we also do that. 

And in the end, if things don't work very well, we can also, we can impose sanctions, we can impose regular payments to address issues. It's very delicate, no? Yeah. And can we go a bit into your typical day? So once you arrive in the office, how could one imagine a day in the life of a banking supervisor? What happens? I steer an area that are general with 200 professionals at the ACB, and a bit more from the NCA perspective. 

So we are in total more than 400 people. So it's very much about meetings. Meetings, meetings, and meetings. 

I think I have an average more than five per day. It can be at different levels with the chair, with ACB reps, it can be with my team, with the managers, it can also be with staff, with the joint supervisory teams. That is part of a daily effort. 

I would highlight also the engagement with banks. I mentioned that the joint supervisory teams are the ones that conduct the daily work. But it's also true that at some point senior managers have to pop in when things are more relevant, or not every interaction with the management bodies. 

So we do it together. And so that's another part of our job that I really like. And that engagement can be at our request, but also can come from banks that they want to highlight relevant topics. 

Do they do that? Yeah, yeah, they do that. We also take decisions. So this means that we have to prepare the information to the supervisory board. 

We also engage with other supervisors within the joint supervisory team. So if it's a French bank, with ACPR, Banque de France, but also with international supervisors such as the Fed in the US or the PRA in the UK, we have banks conducting business in the countries and otherwise. American and British banks do business in Europe. 

We are in charge as systemic and international banks of that part, and we also enjoy it. That interaction can relate to how we do work, but can also engage about particular banks in all our jurisdictions. So it sounds like there is lots of exchange.

Yeah, yeah. It's again people, people, people. So it's in different dimensions.

It may not look like that from outside, right? Banking supervisors, not necessarily people out there, our listeners, for example, might relate to this profession as people, people, people, but it is. Yeah, yeah. It's true that you could think it's more analytical work sitting at your desk, and that's part of the job, but it's much more. 

It's about, in the end, assessing a bank, and bank, it's composed by people. And that's why I also like, so we have to be able to engage with them, to be at the level. And that's not easy, as you can imagine.

What do you think is really the biggest challenge now that you mentioned it's not easy? So what is the biggest challenge of being a supervisor? Is it what you just mentioned, or there is more to that? As I mentioned, our job is so relevant, and banks can fail. They are so leveraged, and that it's important that in your daily job, you're ready to justify yourself in the sense that you've been focused, you've been risk-based, you try to understand when designing where your efforts are going to be, which are the weaker banks, and for a particular banks, which are the weakest parts. So understanding that, it's essential. 

Again, it looks easy, but it's not so easy. It's a lot of work behind daily work, looking at, as I said before, all the available information in the bank, and also benchmarking the bank with others. So getting the right focus is important. 

We are not alone. So we do it collectively, we do it together. I'm sure you know that every year, we update supervisory priorities for the whole system, and we roll it over the years. 

And that is, again, about understanding the main risks, in this case, not only related to a particular bank, for the whole system, and we leverage a lot on the other side of DCB, DG Economics for the macro environment, also financial stability, and markets, and so on. So that is a common endeavor, a common challenge. As the banks are so complex, and they evolve so quickly, training is essential. 

It's very important to keep up. So training, recruiting also plays a very important role, and also leveraging on the expertise of our horizontal topic. And what is that you personally like most in this job? I like the purpose of this job. 

I'm very proud of contributing to the sustainability of the banking system. And if in addition, it's a business about confidence of people, this means how important a job is, and how difficult it is. I like the people dimension, I like in both components, working in the team, people tell me if I'm stressed, I'm never stressed, because it's not my single contribution, it's related to the whole team. 

And all the efforts are from the top managers and to the staff people in the DCB, and in the NCAs. And I also like the challenge of engaging these CEOs, CROs, CFOs, top managers. And also like the challenge of this always evolving. 

I've been 38 years in this business, I'm always learning, things are always changing, and you cannot relax yourself. So it's, I also like that. And before we wrap up, we always have a question that we ask all our guests on the podcast. 

And that's for a hot tip, linked to the topic we just discussed. So what do you have for us today? I will use my experience. No, I won't give names, but I've seen a number of banks that at some point were very successful, so top notch in the countries and in Europe. 

And I've seen them failing later on, 20 years ago, later. And for me, the lesson learned is, this business is very much about humbleness, both bankers and ourselves. And remaining always very vigilant, and it's about the fundamentals. 

So it's an adequate governance with diversity, with checks and balances within the banks. Also, us doing a good job, being well motivated, and willing to engage and keeping up. So for me, that's, I always try to remember this, know that there's success in the past, and doesn't mean success in the future. 

And that arrogancy, and not keeping up with the fundamentals can prone you to a path that you don't want to take. So yeah. Interesting. 

Thank you so much. So I'd like to really thank you, because this brings us to the end of the episode. And Ramon, I repeat again, your qualifications, Ramon Quintana Aguirre, Director General of Systemic and International Banks is very long, but I think it says a lot about the great job you do with your team and all the colleagues. 

Thank you so much for this conversation. Thank you. It's been a pleasure. 

You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Stefania Secola. If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review. And in the spirit of Europe, I'd like to end in Spanish today and say, hasta la próxima.

Muchas gracias. Until next time, thanks for listening.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)