(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

(0:02 - 0:13)
You're listening to the ECB podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Stefania Secola. It's Thursday, the 24th of July, 2025.

(0:14 - 0:28)
And it's time for our regular episode on the monetary policy decisions by our Governing Council. I'll be back at the end of the episode. Now you hear President Christine Lagarde explain those decisions in our press conference.

(0:28 - 0:49)
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. Inflation is currently at a 2% medium-term target. The incoming information is broadly in line with our previous assessment of the inflation outlook.

(0:51 - 1:15)
Domestic pressures have continued to ease, with wages growing more slowly. Partly reflecting our past interest rate cuts, the economy has so far proven resilient overall in a challenging global environment. At the same time, the environment remains exceptionally uncertain, especially because of trade disputes.

(1:16 - 1:52)
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilizes at our 2% target in the medium-term. We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.

(1:53 - 2:16)
We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path. The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing, and will then explain our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.

(2:18 - 2:39)
In the first quarter, the economy grew more strongly than expected. This was partly because firms front-loaded exports ahead of expected tariff hikes. But growth was also bolstered by stronger private consumption and investment.

(2:40 - 3:14)
Recent surveys point to an overall modest expansion in both the manufacturing and services sector. At the same time, higher actual and expected tariffs, the stronger euro, and persistent geopolitical uncertainty are making firms more hesitant to invest. The robust labour market, rising real incomes and solid private sector balance sheets continue to support consumption.

(3:16 - 3:41)
Unemployment stood at 6.3% in May, close to its lowest level since the introduction of the euro. Easier financing conditions are underpinning domestic demand, including in the housing market. Over time, higher public investment in defence and infrastructure should also support growth.

(3:45 - 4:16)
More than ever, the Governing Council considers it crucial to urgently strengthen the euro area and its economy in the present geopolitical environment. Fiscal and structural policies should make the economy more productive, competitive and resilient. Governments should prioritise growth-enhancing structural reforms and strategic investment while ensuring sustainable public finances.

(4:17 - 5:03)
It is important to complete the Savings and Investments Union and the Banking Union following a clear and ambitious timetable, and to rapidly establish the legislative framework for the potential introduction of the digital euro. The Governing Council welcomes the Eurogroup's commitment to improve the effectiveness, quality and composition of public spending, and supports the efforts by European authorities to preserve the mutual benefits of global trade. Annual inflation stood at 2% in June, after 1.9% in May.

(5:04 - 5:36)
Energy prices went up in June, but are still lower than a year ago. Food price inflation eased slightly to 3.1%. Goods inflation edged down to 0.5% in June, whereas services inflation ticked up to 3.3% from 3.2% in May. Indicators of underlying inflation are overall consistent with our 2% medium-term target.

(5:38 - 6:03)
Labour costs have continued to moderate. Year-on-year growth in compensation per employee slowed to 3.8% in the first quarter, down from 4.1% in the previous quarter. Combined with stronger productivity growth, this led to slower growth in unit labour costs.

(6:04 - 6:43)
Forward-looking indicators, including the ECB's wage tracker and surveys on wage expectations of firms, consumers and professional forecasters, point to a further decline in wage growth. Short-term consumer inflation expectations declined in both May and June, reversing the uptick observed in previous months. Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2%, supporting the stabilisation of inflation around our target.

(6:45 - 7:05)
Turning now to the risk assessment. Risks to economic growth remain tilted to the downside. Among the main risks are further escalation in global trade tensions and associated uncertainties, which could dampen exports and drag down investment and consumption.

(7:07 - 7:41)
A deterioration in financial market sentiment could lead to tighter financing conditions and greater risk aversions, and make firms and households less willing to invest and consume. Geopolitical tensions, such as Russia's unjustified war against Ukraine and the tragic conflict in the Middle East, remain a major source of uncertainty. By contrast, if trade and geopolitical tensions were resolved swiftly, this could lift sentiment and spur activity.

(7:42 - 8:06)
Higher defence and infrastructure spending, together with productivity-enhancing reforms, would add to growth. An improvement in business confidence would also stimulate private investment. The outlook for inflation is more uncertain than usual as a result of the volatile global trade policy environment.

(8:07 - 8:36)
A stronger euro could bring inflation down further than expected. Moreover, inflation could turn out to be lower if higher tariffs lead to lower demand for euro area exports and induce countries with overcapacity to reroute their exports to the euro area. Trade tensions could lead to greater volatility and risk aversion in financial markets, which would weigh on domestic demand and would thereby also lower inflation.

(8:37 - 9:10)
But by contrast, inflation could turn out to be higher if a fragmentation of global supply chains pushed up import prices and added to capacity constraints in a domestic economy. A boost in defence and infrastructure spending could also raise inflation over the medium term. Extreme weather events and the unfolding of climate crisis more broadly could drive up food prices by more than expected.

(9:13 - 9:31)
So looking at the financial and monetary conditions now. Market interest rates have increased since our last meeting, especially at longer maturities. At the same time, our past interest rate cuts continue to make corporate borrowing less expensive.

(9:32 - 10:06)
The average interest rate on new loans to firms declined to 3.7% in May from 3.8% in April. The cost of issuing market-based debt also came down, falling to 3.6% in May. While the growth rate of loans to firms moderated to 2.5% in May, corporate bond issuance was stronger, growing at a rate of 3.4% in annual terms.

(10:08 - 10:45)
Credit standards for business loans were broadly unchanged in the second quarter, as reported in our latest bank lending survey for the euro area. While banks' concerns about the economic risks faced by their customers had a tightening impact on credit standards, this was broadly offset by stronger competition among lenders. Meanwhile, firms' demand for credit increased slightly, benefiting from lower interest rates, but they remained cautious because of global uncertainty and trade tensions.

(10:46 - 11:19)
The average interest rate on new mortgages has barely changed since the start of the year, and stood at 3.3% in May. Growth in mortgage lending edged up to 2% in May, in the context of a strong increase in demand, while credit standards tightened slightly in the second quarter. So, in conclusion, the Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged.

(11:21 - 11:52)
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our 2% target in the medium term. We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. Our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it in light of the incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.

(11:53 - 12:25)
We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path. In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our medium-term target, and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy transmission. Would you like to know more? Check out the show notes for visual material about our Governing Council decisions, and the full transcript of the discussion with journalists during the press conference.

(12:26 - 12:36)
The next press conference will be on 11 September 2025. In the meantime, stay tuned for new episodes. You've been listening to the ECB Podcast with Stefania Cecola.

(12:36 - 12:46)
If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review. And in the spirit of Europe, I'd like to end in Portuguese and say, até breve! Until next time, thanks for listening.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)