(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

Our euro family is growing. Bulgaria is gearing up to join and adopt the euro. Will the transition bring harmony or hesitation? Let's explore the hopes, fears and possibilities of this historic change.

You're listening to the ECB Podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Stefania Secola. A currency is not just a means of payment.

It's a symbol of national identity, history and pride. So it's natural that such a big change brings questions. I'm joined today by Ferdinand Dreher, who has researched public opinion on the euro in countries before and after adopting the euro.

Welcome to the podcast, Ferdinand. Thank you very much for having me, Stefania. Ferdinand, you are from Germany, right? Do you still remember what was it like for you when Germany changed from the Deutsche Mark to the euro? So, I remember parts of it.

I mean, I was a kid at the time, right? So for me, I grew up with the euro, but I do remember certain elements of that time. At the same time, I think the euro has always felt like a very natural currency for me, a natural way of paying for things. And I couldn't really imagine a world without the euro.

But as a kid, I was kind of always very interested in collecting things. So for me, it was actually quite an exciting time to see that currency changeover because there was the currency leaving. So I collected one of each coin of this old currency.

And then my attention very quickly shifted to the new currency. And that was in 2002. So there was 12 countries joining the euro area at the time.

And 12 countries means 12 different sets of euro coins. So a lot of coins for me to collect and keeping me very busy for a long time. Do you still have them? I do still have them.

And maybe another sort of anecdotal thing that I remember is from that transitional period. So I remember seeing in supermarkets, there were sort of two different prices displayed on things. And as I mentioned, I was a kid at the time.

So one of the things that really stuck with me might seem a bit random at first, but was a huge jar of chocolate spread. And I can explain it, but I've also brought it. Yes, show us.

So what I have here is a big jar of what used to have chocolate spread in. And this was not just any, let's say, jar of chocolate spread, but it was commemorative for the introduction of the euro. So it has a sort of the Deutsche Mark on the top.

And not only was it sort of clever marketing in the sense that it was saying, okay, the mark is leaving, the euro is coming, and our product stays the same. That was kind of the marketing angle to this. But it helped me remember that conversion rate because the weight of the jar is 1.95583 kilograms of chocolate spread.

Ah, not exactly two kilo, but 1.9? Yeah, to the extent that they could do this. Yes, it was exactly that sort of conversion rate from marks to euros. Okay.

And so that really helped me remember the time as a kid. Of course, it's a very easy way to remember it then. Nice.

That currency conversion rate. And of course, ironically, that's the same as Bulgarians have today. Yeah.

With the Lev having been sort of under a currency board initially against the Deutsche Mark one to one, Bulgarians will have the exact same conversion rate that I did as a kid at the time. Amazing. Very nice to hear.

And as you know, today, eight out of 10 people living in your area say that really the euro is good for them and their country. And this is, of course, not always been the case. I remember myself, you mentioned before, when the 12 countries adopted the euro in 2002, I had family and friends even asking me directly, Stefania, how is this going to work? How is this going to play out? And also in Germany, I think from where you are, I don't know if you remember anybody asking the same questions to the adults.

So Bulgarians are not alone on this. We all live that. But there are fears and concerns, of course, that we wanted to hear from.

And we sent the podcast team to meet with Michaela, Stefan, also known as Cefo, and Elena. They live in Bulgaria and work as content creators for social media. And we really asked them, what is your biggest concern and fear about the euro adoption? Let's listen in what they have to say.

Well, I come from a generation whose parents suffered a huge collapse economically in 1996, when the Bulgarian currency meant nothing one day after the other. And luckily, we are now a generation that does not have to suffer from that. So we are quite stable, right? The biggest fear is actually coming from one constant thing, which is people's greed.

So, you know, thinking about inflation and prices going up, when you think about it, it's like a compound thing. It's like, okay, which merchant would decide tomorrow, on the 1st of January, that they were selling like a kilo of apples for a left 75 cents. And now they're going to round it up into a euro and 50 maybe.

You know, all these speculations, compounding, they'll definitely probably result in a diminution in our baskets and so this is my biggest fear of how much some opportunists will take advantage of that. A lot of people in Bulgaria are talking about inflation and most of the time they mention what happened to Italy and what happened to Croatia. I know that it's a very different situation and people should have in mind the different factors that were happening for them back then when Italy joined and also Croatia joined and if there is some inflation I don't think it's going to be that long and we can also prepare for this.

The good thing about Europe is that we are a free market and it's self-regulating so it's all about the consumer and it's all about our choices whether we would actually allow for opportunists like that to take advantage. So I have no fear, only the bright future I hope. To be extremely honest with you I don't have any fears at all and my argument behind that is that wealthier societies better organized than ours than the Bulgarian society have adopted the euro as a national currency so that gives me faith that this is our normal way in front of us our path as well as also we want to be part of the European Union so this is part of our integration part of our path to the civilization in general.

So I'm pretty happy that a lot of euro-skeptics would be not so happy from 1st of January 2026. So some are fearless but others are really afraid of the price increase inflation and Ferdinand you've looked at this from your perspective and you looked at the trends in countries that have already adopted the euro in the past and looked at it also to understand the concerns that they had. What resounds with you of what these people have already said in Bulgaria and what does your research say? So I mean indeed the sort of the dominant theme that we hear from these replies is one that sounds very familiar because what we did in our analysis was to look at survey responses of citizens in these countries before adoption.

So maybe to give a bit of background we're focusing as you said on the countries that adopted the euro after 2002 so that starts with Slovenia in 2007 Cyprus and Malta in 2008 and so on and so forth until Croatia in 2023 and that gives us eight countries in total and the data we look at is part of a sort of a long standing series of surveys it's called the Eurobarometer and it asks respondents predominantly in EU countries on a range of issues about their views and one of these surveys is an annual survey among countries that haven't yet adopted the euro so there they are asked about their concerns surrounding the introduction of the euro and so we're looking at that last year before they introduced the currency so in the case of Slovenia for example which introduced it in 2007 we're looking at the survey responses in 2006 and we kind of have three main factors that come out of there and the first is indeed the one that we heard prominently just now it's sort of concerns that the introduction and the conversion and the changeover of the currency will lead to higher prices now that is of course as we heard it's a very sort of understandable concern and it's quite widespread it was about three and four people that articulated that concern and part of that concern is also sort of is how will shops convert the prices from old to new prices and will they sort of round them up then a second factor we see in these surveys is one about sort of identity and we see people articulate that you know they're concerned that they lose a bit of their national identity and of course it's understandable that a currency sort of keeps it's a uniting factor of citizens in one country and of course it's something they also associate with certain moments in life I'd say in particular older respondents you know maybe the first car they bought was in that currency right so it's a certain it's memories that are attached to that and so I think that's very understandable as well so it's not just country history but it's really very much personal history of course indeed it's very much intertwined I think with personal experiences and that wasn't a concern for as many people as the prices so this was about 50% respondents on average but it was sort of popping up as still a prominent factor interesting and then there's a third factor and the third factor is about sort of national control over the economic sort of situation and I think that's also understandable in the sense that you can have that concern that interest rates are now not being set in your own country anymore and that can be a bit unsettling I think also makes a lot of sense but again that was something that fewer respondents felt so it was about 40% of respondents on average that were concerned about this factor and this also has to do with the knowledge that the central banks is actually setting up interest rates or was back then and then now it will be centralized so to say indeed indeed so maybe one factor to bring in there as well I think it's also not surprising to some extent that the concerns are going to be a dominant thing before the adoption right so we're talking about in some cases inconveniences so you know your wages or your pension change and you're not sure what that will look like afterwards versus what it looked like before you have new notes and coins to get used to and these are kind of like everyday sort of inconveniences at the beginning whereas the benefits of the euro kind of only materialize later on so I think it's quite natural that at that sort of stage in the process people are focusing first on the concerns and of course if information is sort of not really complete and people are missing information then of course that's going to be even more of a concern right and then that will play out more strongly and concerns are only one side of the story people also have hopes so the podcast team asked Michaela, Stefan and Elena what are your biggest hopes for Bulgaria adopting the euro? Let's listen in. Well actually you catch us in a very good moment just yesterday just yesterday about I think 250,000 people have protested for resignation I get goosebumps now talking to you and we've achieved it we've achieved resignation we were fighting against corruption and I believe now it's very symbolical that the euro is coming in like 2-3 weeks and of course it's not a magic wand it's not going to solve all our problems but I believe it's going to equalize our economy this is my biggest hope as someone who is I'm a person I'm a citizen of the world right when I go to Italy and when I go to France and when I go to Germany I want to feel like an equal part of the European economy and this is my biggest hope that things will equalize and we're going to make a better future for us my biggest hope is definitely in terms of what will happen with the capital markets and long term investors whether they will have like more interest in Bulgaria I really hope that will happen probably not in like a year or two but in the long run Bulgaria will be seen as a more stable country and definitely like attract more investors I hope that more tourists will come to Sofia to some other Bulgarian cities and they will realize that they will have one less setback and negative when they prepare for such a short or long trip they simply won't need to exchange the currency so maybe they will choose Sofia instead of Belgrade let's say and also what else another hope would be for more foreign investments unfortunately this is not the only thing when it comes down to investments it's the currency is not the most important thing for sure another thing would be the rule of law so maybe the second one is way more important but also I think that such mutual currency is a step forward leaving completely the political dimension aside which is not for us to discuss of course it's certainly encouraging to hear so many positive expectations but Ferdinand from your researcher's perspective how do people's feelings change or evolve before and after adopting the euro you mentioned already something but also in terms of hopes and expectations yeah so I mean the overarching finding let's say of our analysis is one of that basically this public support for the euro is one that increases significantly the moment sort of adoption occurs so we look at a different survey in this euro series and the response is there to a question a very simple question really on whether the person is for or against the common currency and what we do see there as a sort of general observation is it's quite common that the views are mixed and there's some skepticism before the introduction but at the same time what's equally consistent is that significant rise in that first survey after adoption so we're really looking at that last survey before introduction and that first survey afterwards and we're looking at the change that happens there and that change is quite large and it's remarkably consistent so we see it in all countries we see it in all demographic groups and it's also one that sort of lasts after that adoption has occurred so it's not something that goes away and so of course the question for us was why is that and I think here the hopes play in but also the concerns that we just mentioned also play in in the sense that the concerns may not materialize right so it's a relief kind of exactly it's a bit of a relief effect so you had these fears initially and but at the same time you know that this transition is prepared quite carefully you have national authorities you have European authorities they're all working to inform the public with information campaigns you know I think also supermarkets let's say for day-to-day purchases are doing their part to try and inform citizens and alleviate their concerns and so if that works and if come first of January you know you go to the cash machine and euros come out as you were told would happen but you weren't necessarily sure if it really would and when it does you feel better exactly and your wages are arriving in euros and it's converted the way you wanted to and you know prices are being declared in a very transparent way so travel to another country or to many countries on this continent and pay with what is now your own currency that's a lot less hassle you can shop online it's all in euros now you don't have to worry about any fees that the government currency so that's very practical benefits for citizens of course there's businesses that benefit as well they no longer have to think about exchange rate risks if they're dealing across borders and then you have also these more macro or country level benefits that were also alluded to in the responses that we heard in the sense that your country is now part of a larger currency area that might attract trade and investment so you really have in several dimensions benefits materializing that can really together with the absence of these fears materializing build trust in a currency and what do you think of what Stefan said before about euroskeptics what's happening to euroskeptics in your survey in your research yes I mean it's I guess it depends a bit on how you define a euroskeptic but I think if you define a euroskeptic as someone who is against the introduction of a currency then of course I can't sort of project how this will evolve in Bulgaria's case specifically but if we look at the experience of these other eight countries then you know that consistent pattern of on average it was 11 percentage points more respondents saying they support the euro so let's say it was 50% supporting it before adoption then on average it's 61% afterwards that does you know does show that for all these other eight countries that we've seen so far that that sort of share of euroskepticism would decline quite substantially so there is a huge share also a big share of undecisiveness of course because it's part of the looking at the change how the change plays out so interesting and what happens you mentioned already before national identity but I would be interested to hear more how what happens to after the adoption of the euro what happens to the concerns around national identity do people feel that having the euro diminishes their national identity so what the surveys would suggest to us is that that's not the case so instead I think the survey results speak more to the idea that the national identity still remains and that the European layer of identity is kind of added to that national identity so it's kind of identity adapting but in a sort of additive sort of complementary way rather than sort of taking away from one another and because of course if we think about it I mean I think what makes Europe so great among other things is cultural diversity and the richness of it and none of that changes by going from one currency to another also because we have the coins looking the way they look so we have a European side so we have one European side we have a map there showing that this is sort of our continent and then we have the national side with that national symbol that national history or identity and that's something we can associate with so I think that is a big part of it and a really good example and so I think that contributes but of course also you're at that point joining as I was mentioning earlier you're joining kind of a larger currency area and I think that can also come with a sense of pride you belong to something bigger you belong to something European so I think all of this contributes to a European layer that comes in addition to the national layer and what we also kind of at least tentatively see in the surveys is that the feeling of the Euro adding something a European feeling to you as an individual that's something that seems to grow also gradually after the adoption in the years that follow Interesting so this is also very interesting to observe and we can take away a message then from this what is in your view the message not just for the Bulgarians who are about to adopt the Euro but also for other countries who in the future might want to adopt the Euro So I think the message from the data let's say is quite clear right and it's one that okay these concerns and these mixed opinions they're really not uncommon but we at the same time have a really good message we see the moment that this currency has been introduced right there's actually it seems less to worry about it might be the benefits it might be the identity it might be the concerns not playing out but we really have that public opinion going up and at the same time we're also seeing people feel identity and people perceiving practical benefits in their everyday life both sort of nationally and across countries of the Euro zone and I think that's very encouraging Absolutely so concerns are normal but the benefits will come so thank you so much Ferdinand so with 1st of January 2026 approaching fast it was great to better understand how some Bulgarians feel about the Euro and this is really really important for us and because we know also that this how the experience look like in other countries so thank you about your research before we close there's one more thing at this stage we always ask our guests for a hot tip what do you have for our listeners Ferdinand? So I thought about this for a bit my hot tip is very simple actually it's to look at the coins next time you pay with cash I think what we can see on coins is a bit what I alluded to earlier as well we see the benefits of the Euro and we see identity so we see we have coins with a rich sort of display of different national cultures and histories and I think it depends of course where you are when you pick up this coin let's say you're in Germany and you're looking at this coin and it's a coin from a different country then that coin has potentially travelled more than you did this week to end up in your wallet and I think that's kind of the beauty of the Euro it shows very much that benefit that someone can take their Euro from the country that they live in go aboard pay there and then that currency sort of circulates and it shows that sort of shared European history on the one side of the coin and I think even if you know all these coins there's commemorative coins that come out sometimes like there's a continued opportunity to look at the face of that coin and learn a bit more about the culture of Europe or the culture of that specific country so I think that's a sort of yes just a very sort of summarises in a beautiful way kind of what Europe is all about. Very nice.

So if I put one Euro coin somewhere my personal history gets connected to the one of the person who takes the Euro coin and goes somewhere else. Very interesting. Exactly.

So I think also in the case of Bulgarians I mean for you specifically I think what you will also experience and I experienced as a child myself is that the introduction of the currency kind of leads to some dynamics in your wallet in the sense that at the beginning you will just see Bulgarian Euro coins. You will see that national face that you associate with the strongest. And I think that's a great period to sort of to warm up to that currency if you aren't yet warmed up to it and to really identify it on a national level and sort of this is my currency.

And then over time as sort of the benefits of the Euro quite practically play out you know people from abroad will come to Bulgaria with their Euro coins with their national face on and they will end up in your wallet and then that's sort of great opportunity to look at these coins again and say okay this is what a French coin looks like or this is what a Spanish coin looks like and to learn more about these countries and to then see sort of the beauty of the Euro and the Euro area and the richness of it in action. And it's still the same currency. And it's still the same currency.

Thank you so much Ferdinand for being with us today. Thank you for having me. This brings us to the end of this episode.

You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Stefania Secola. If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review. In the spirit of Europe and to honour our friends in Bulgaria who are preparing to adopt the Euro, I'd like to end to say do skoro.

Until next time, thanks for listening.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)