(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

On 30 September 2019, months before anyone had ever heard of COVID-19, we published the first ever episode of the ECB podcast. Back then, we discussed innovation in payments, Libra, blockchain and cryptoassets, and it sparked lots of interest, as you can imagine. Quite a lot has changed since then, in the world, but also on the ECB podcast.

And today, we are recording our 100th episode. We've come a long way, and that's basically thanks to you, our listeners. And if you've enjoyed the journey, please subscribe and become part of the ECB podcast community.

You're listening to the ECB podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Stefania Secola. And I'm Paul Gordon. 

And as you say, Stefania, we've hit a milestone, one to 100. It's taken us five and a half years, this journey. In the 99 episodes so far, we've explored a wide range of topics related to central banking and banking supervision.

We've chatted for about 2,200 minutes. That's a lot of conversation, and welcomed around 55 different guests. Of course, I'm relatively new. 

I've been a small part of that. But what are we going to do now for our 100? Well, as the two regular podcast hosts, of course, we usually interview ECB executive board members. That's key. 

Experts from within the bank, also experts from outside the bank. It's been quite a variety. Today, we thought we'd do something different by reflecting on these five plus years of podcasts.

And there will be a couple of surprise guests. So stick around for that. Sure. 

But before we kick it off, let me say that we would love to hear more from you, our listeners. For that purpose, I already had the pleasure to interview some of you who are visiting the ECB here in Frankfurt. And I asked, what is that you would like to know more about? Here's what you said.

I would like to hear about digital euro. I think it's really a growing topic today. And a lot of students would be actually interested in hearing from that.

I would actually love to hear a podcast on the health of banks, of European banks. And how they would survive, like probably an ecological crisis or something like this. Probably on the way people decide on the interest rates they're going to put into place.

Like how, what research do they do? And how do they ultimately take the decision of saying right now we will put it at 3% or whatever. And those are really interesting points as really they help us shape future podcasts. So please tell us more.

For example, what is your favorite episode? And what is that you like or you don't like? Why and when do you listen to our podcast? Let us know in the comments or on our social media channels. Paul, you joined the ECB's communication team in 2021. And have been hosting the podcast since last summer.

Why are podcasts useful for central banks communication in your view? It's an interesting question. And frankly to me it's quite amazing how podcasts have taken off in recent years in general. They date back at least until 2003.

This was the development of RSS feeds, really simple syndication. Which made delivery of content easier in general. But it's more than that I think.

What helps is that because of the rise of this highly mobile equipment, smart phones, tablets, ear pods, they're highly versatile. And so you can listen to them anywhere. I normally listen to them while walking or running or in the gym for example.

A lot of people do that which you didn't be able to, weren't able to do very easily in the past in the old radio days. And of course the variety is vast. True crime podcasts I think are still the most popular.

But I'll make a different type of recommendation later on for a podcast. Coming to the question of central banking and economics podcasts. I think they've got a bright future.

I think they're very useful. It allows us to explain what we do and why we do it to a large audience that we might not normally reach. Because people work of course.

They don't have the time to listen to the press conferences, the speeches that tend to happen during the day. So this is another channel and a very important one. Yeah and audience being really a very important point for our podcast but in general.

But what do you think is so important for people to know the ECB and what it does? Well it's not just about transparency for the sake of transparency of course is it? It's explaining what we do and why has a real world impact. And this is critical. So our mandate is to keep prices stable as you know.

If people understand what that means in practice and how our tools actually work to achieve that. Then that affects their expectations of future inflation. And therefore their behavior when they spend or save money.

So we get it right. That in itself helps to keep prices stable. But we have to reach people.

I agree. Central banks need to be transparent and understandable. And with the podcast we really can go to the bottom of things.

And I would like to add another point. With a podcast we can also turn things around and listen to our listeners. When you host a podcast for a while you get to get a good sense of what works and what doesn't.

And also if people say yeah podcast is very much one way street kind of tool. Well yeah but also not really. Because if it works it works.

If the listeners tune in they tune in. And if they don't we understand maybe the topic doesn't work or whatever else doesn't work right. And we also want to enhance this engagement with our audience.

And it's not by chance that for example we increased the dialogue with our Ask ECB episode. Which we publish in October 2024. And that's going to be linked in the show notes.

But it was an interesting one. I remember it well. What is it that made that episode so special for you? Well it was very special for me because it's the first time we invited our listeners into the podcast.

Of course not physically in this room. But we asked them to send us their questions and record voice messages on Instagram. And we answered those questions on the show.

You might remember there was a question on swiftflation. So somebody asked I remember it was Rebecca her name. She asked the potential impact of Taylor Swift concerts on inflation in the cities where she's singing.

Another one was on the new series of banknotes for the future of course. And another one on digital euro. And for those of you who want to know the answers as Paul said check the show notes.

I mean the Taylor Swift example is a great one. And it's what I love about economics and central backing. Because often people think of it as very esoteric.

But there's a real world connection. And it helps on shows like this to be able to explain them. And the interactive element is great as well.

And with people like Taylor Swift and the Taylor Swift example it helps to connect with younger people. Yes but not just also the not so young people. There are fans across all age groups of Taylor Swift.

So it helps us to build an engaged and one hopes loyal audience that comes back for more episodes. Absolutely. And this is why we plan to do another episode Ask ACB in the future.

And not so far away future. So if anyone listening has questions please submit it as a voice message to the ACB Instagram channel. And we hope to hear from you.

Of course our account is also tagged in the show notes. But how about you Paul? What is the episode that stood out in your view? There's only a small number of the ones that I've done myself to pick from there. But I am going to pick one of those perhaps selfishly.

It's one of the early ones. And what made it stand out was the setting, the topic and the guest. It was one of our external guests.

And it was at our annual central banking conference in Sintra in Portugal. I interviewed Moritz Schulerich who is the president of the Kiel Institute for the World of Economy. And the topic was how wars and geopolitics affect the economy and what it means for central banks.

And I found it fascinating because what Moritz has done is research to try to quantify the impact of geopolitical events whether nearby or far away on people's real economic lives. The episode is called War, Geopolitics and the Economy. It was published in July 2024.

And again you can see that in the show notes. Long show notes this time. And this topic is still relevant today even more than six months ago with the geopolitical tensions and the protectionist tendencies.

Yeah. I mean this is key because there are obvious tangible impacts to these tensions. The surge in energy prices when Russia invaded Ukraine.

You see that at the petrol pump for example when you fill up your car. But the geopolitical tensions, speculation about tariffs for example, also create uncertainty. And that complicates the outlook for the economy.

It can hold back demand of course because people don't know when and what they should buy. It can also hold back supply though because companies may hold off on investment. So this is very important for us as a central bank when we work to ensure price stability which is a balance of supply and demand and also financial stability because that uncertainty can extend to markets and banks.

So you look at an episode like that, you listen to it, and it's a kind of an evergreen. You would hope all these tensions dissipate quickly but they haven't. So it's a kind of evergreen.

You can still listen to today seven months later and get useful insights which is another great advantage of podcasts. The best ones don't date quickly. Now Stefania, I want to quiz you.

I'm ready. Which episode would you say is our all-time top track as it were in terms of listens? Okay, if I have to think on top of my head, I have I think three in mind. One is related to interest rate hikes and what it meant for people, economy, inflation.

And I think this dates back in summer 2022. And I think back then it had lots of interest. It sparked lots of interest.

Another one I'm sure also hitting very high is the discussion between President Christine Lagarde, EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, and then US Secretary of the Treasury Janet Yellen. I'm sure also this must be very popular. And the third one I have in mind is actually not one single episode but a topic.

Anything about digital euro sparks normally lots of interest. So in October 22, we recorded even two entire episodes just to digital euro. I think also those could be in the top ranks.

Excellent. You've done your homework indeed. Yeah, all of those in the top most listened to episodes.

But the podcast team has checked. We have a small podcast team, hardworking. And it's actually the one with Christine Lagarde, Ursula von der Leyen, and Janet Yellen.

That was the big one published in July 2021. A conversation about female empowerment, the need for an inclusive recovery, and transatlantic cooperation. It's always a popular topic.

For our listeners, we'll link to all of the episodes in the show notes below, of course. Yeah, Paul, I remember this episode very well. Yes, it was certainly a big one.

But neither of us was the ECB podcast host at the time. So, and here is our first surprise guest, we asked our longtime host, Katie Ranger, about her experience back then. And here's what she said.

I can remember this episode like it was yesterday. It was the first time we recorded outside of Frankfurt. And there was a lot of excitement in the team as we jumped on the train and headed to the European Commission in Brussels.

Topic-wise, we managed to pack a lot into the episode. Female economic empowerment, the impact of the pandemic, and even international cooperation. But for me, there was something else that made it really unique.

Listening to these three incredible leaders talking to each other in what was really quite an intimate setting. You felt like you were part of a conversation amongst friends. It was a really special episode for the team, and it's so good to see that even after several years, it's still popular with listeners.

So that was Katie Ranger, the previous host of the podcast, and it was great to hear from her. Yes. What I like about that episode, and what many others in fact, is that we can invite non-ECB speakers to discuss their views.

Now, we've done this many times, as I mentioned. It's a great way to bring in external knowledge and get a different perspective. I have a next question, though.

Who do you think is our all-time most frequent guest? Well, I guess it depends. It depends a bit how you count, because since December 2021, we have our president, Christine Lagarde, in the podcast presenting the monetary policy decisions at our press conference. And this happens every six weeks, which combined with her other appearances on the podcast must make her the front-runner.

But if you exclude these episodes, I think it has to do with our chief economist, Philipp Lange. He regularly joins the podcast to speak about development in inflation and the economy in the euro area. And just like in the episode last month, he is really a frequent guest here.

I actually counted 11 appearances. Do you know that he even sat in one of our summer school series? So they were, what, three times in a row? And this was summer 2023. Yep. 

The podcast team confirms you are correct. It was Philipp Lange. The summer school episodes were an interesting way of doing the podcast for us.

What made it special in your view? Well, I think they are special because they really explain how our work impacts the life of Europeans. And consider, for example, when we speak about inflation and monetary policy, this is really at the heart of what we do here. And why is it relevant for our listeners and people out there? Because most of us as citizens, we work hard for money.

We try to really go well with our goals when it comes to saving, investing, buying a house, starting a business. So monetary policy and the euro maintaining its value is very important to each and every European. It is really about preserving the value of our euro.

And this kind of episode really explains how the ECB takes care of the euro and how this contributes to the stability that we all need when it comes to personal finances. Paul, do you know that we did one summer school also for banking supervision? I recall this was last summer. And basically we had our guest explaining how the work of banking supervision also has to do with citizens because they keep their banks safe.

And it was also at a moment where we had the Euro 2024, like the football matches, and one of our guests was very, very accurate to make metaphors to explain banking supervision using football. It was very interesting, I think. I'm sure a lot of work went into that.

That's wonderful. Now, you mentioned, Stefania, that the president is a regular guest on the podcast and she is our second surprise guest of the day. For the occasion of the 100th episode, she sent us a voice message speaking about her favourite episode.

So let me introduce ECB President Christine Lagarde. There have been many great episodes on monetary policy, the economy, financial stability, banking supervision, you just name it. But one of my favourite personal experiences was appearing on the podcast with Ngozi Okonga-Iweala.

And what did we talk about? Women in the economy and female leadership. That was about two years ago, but unfortunately it doesn't make it less relevant. So if you have a chance, even in 2025, I can only recommend that you listen to that episode in particular and the other 99 ones.

All the best. And this was President Christine Lagarde and her favourite episodes. And Paul, as you've seen, we've covered a huge variety of topics in our 100 episodes and we plan to do more.

We will indeed. But we're sadly near the end of this episode. But stay with us because one of the best bits of podcasts is the hot tip.

And your 100th episode bonus is you get two hot tips today. Stefania, yours first. Indeed.

My hot tip is to use this 100 episode old podcast to announce a new birth. On 14th of January 2024, we launched a new YouTube channel called Espresso Economics, where we explain in a cool format a bit more about the basics. So how does inflation work? What is supply and demand? How do prices come about, for example? It is really hot, like a good espresso in winter, and potentially fresh, like, what can I say, a cool coffee in summer.

So I recommend everyone to have a look. We'll, of course, add the link in the show notes. And for those who already know everything about it, and many of our listeners already know everything about it, please think if anyone in your community could benefit of this new YouTube channel called Espresso Economics.

It's going to be worth listening to. I'm one of the people who has to review all of these in my role here at the ECB, so I've seen them all, and they're excellent, and I strongly recommend them. So my hot tip is it's another podcast series.

It's called Things Fell Apart. Not things fall apart, but things fell apart. It's by British journalist John Ronson, who lives in the US, and he does a deep dive into the culture wars.

And I think this is highly relevant for all of us at the moment, all those narratives that have been building up for years, such as the anti-vaccine movement, lockdown conspiracies, Davos conspiracies, Pizzagate, the satanic panic. He goes into all of these. But what makes his podcast stand out? That he goes as far back as he can to uncover the origin of these narratives.

When he speaks to the people involved, he uncovers old interviews to try to work out why these narratives develop, because they don't come out of nowhere. It's sympathetically done. It's full of surprises.

And as Ronson says, he refers to pebbles being thrown into a lake when untruths spread. The ripples can be devastating. It feels more important than ever to try to hold on to the truth like driftwood in the ocean, because if not, we might drown.

And for us, that's highly relevant. We want to make sure people understand the facts. And they can make their own analysis.

They can do what they like. But the facts are very, very important in this current era. So that's Things Fell Apart.

It's on the BBC Sounds app, for example, but also elsewhere. And I strongly recommend it. Cool.

And this brings us to the end of our 100th episode of the ECB podcast. Don't forget to submit your questions, dear listeners, for the next Ask ECB, as I said above. Send us, give us your comments, what you like, what you don't.

And thanks again to all of you for tuning in and making 100th episode of the ECB podcast possible. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Stefania Sekula. And Paul Gordon.

And if you like what you've heard, please subscribe. Please leave us a review. In the spirit of Europe, I'd like to end in French.

It was Stefania who introduced this tradition of our farewells in foreign languages. I introduced the tradition of mangling it awfully. But the French I can probably reasonably handle.

A bientôt. Until next time, thanks for listening. Thank you.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)