(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

[Speaker 2] (0:00 - 0:21)
You're listening to the ECB podcast bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Paul Gordon. Today is Thursday the 5th of June 2025 and our Governing Council has just decided what's needed for prices to be stable in the euro area.

Listeners President Christine Lagarde explains those decisions in our press conference.

[Speaker 1] (0:22 - 16:46)
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In particular the decision to lower the deposit facility rate, the rate through which we steer the monetary policy stance, is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. Inflation is currently at around our 2% medium-term target.

In the baseline of the new euro system staff projections, headline inflation is set to average 2% in 2025, 1.6% in 2026 and 2% in 2027. The downward revisions compared with the March projections by 0.3% point for both 25 and 26 mainly reflect lower assumptions for energy prices and a stronger euro. Staff expects inflation excluding energy and food to average 2.4% in 2025 and 1.9% in both 26 and 27, broadly unchanged since March. Staff see real GDP growth averaging 0.9% in 25, 1.1% in 26 and 1.3% in 27. The unrevised growth projection for 2025 reflects a stronger than expected first quarter combined with weaker prospects for the remainder of the year. While the uncertainty surrounding trade policies is expected to weigh on business investment and exports, especially in the short term, rising government investment in defence and infrastructure will increasingly support growth over the medium term.

Higher real incomes and a robust labour market will allow households to spend more. Together with more favourable financing conditions, this should make the economy more resilient to global shocks. In the context of high uncertainty, staff also assessed some of the mechanisms by which different trade policies could affect growth and inflation under some alternative illustrative scenarios.

These scenarios will be published with the staff projections on our website. Under this scenario analysis, a further escalation of trade tensions over the coming months would result in growth and inflation being below the baseline projections. By contrast, if trade tensions were resolved with a benign outcome, growth and to a lesser extent inflation would be higher in the baseline projections.

Most measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will settle at around our 2% medium term target on a sustained basis. Wage growth is still elevated but continues to moderate visibly and profits are partially buffering its impact on inflation. The concerns that increased uncertainty and a volatile market response to the trade tension in April would have a tightening impact on financing condition have eased.

We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our 2% medium term target. Especially in current conditions of exceptional uncertainty, we will follow a data dependent and meeting by meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. Our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.

We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path. The decisions taken today are set out in a press release that is available on our website. So I will now outline in more details how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.

The economy grew by 0.3% in the first quarter of 2025 according to Eurostat's flash estimate. Unemployment at 6.2% in April is at its lowest level since the launch of the euro. Unemployment grew by 0.3% in the first quarter of the year according to the flash estimate. In line with the staff projections, survey data point overall to some weaker prospects in the near term. While manufacturing has strengthened, partly because trade has been brought forward in anticipation of higher tariff, the more domestically oriented services sector is slowing. Higher tariffs and a stronger euro are expected to make it harder for firms to export.

High uncertainty is expected to weigh on investment but at the same time several factors are keeping the economy resilient and should support growth over the medium term. A strong labour market, rising real incomes, robust private sector balance sheets and easier financing conditions, in part because of our past interest rate cuts, should all help consumers and firms withstand the fallout from a volatile global environment. Recently announced measures to step up defence and infrastructure investment should also bolster growth.

In the present geopolitical environment it is even more urgent for fiscal and structural policies to make the euro area economy more productive, more competitive and more resilient. The European Commission's Competitiveness Compass provides a concrete roadmap for action and its proposals, including on simplification, should be swiftly adopted. This includes completing the Savings and Investment Union following a clear and ambitious timetable.

It is also important to rapidly establish the legislative framework to prepare the ground for potential introduction of a digital euro. Governments should ensure sustainable public finances in line with the EU's economic governance framework while prioritising essential growth-enhancing structural reforms and strategic investment. Looking at inflation, annual inflation declined to 1.9% in May from 2.2% in April according to Eurostat's flash estimates. Energy price inflation remained at minus 3.6%. Food price inflation rose to 3.3% from 3% the month before. Goods inflation was unchanged at 0.6% while services inflation dropped to 3.2% from 4% in April. Services inflation had jumped in April mainly because prices for travel services around the Easter holidays went up by more than expected.

Most indicators of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will stabilise sustainably at our 2% medium-term target. Labour costs are gradually moderating as indicated by incoming data on negotiated wages and available country data on compensation per employee. The ECB's wage tracker points to a further easing of negotiated wage growth in 2025 while the staff projections see wage growth falling to below 3% in 2026 and 2027.

While lower energy prices and a stronger euro are putting downward pressure on inflation in the near term, inflation is expected to return to target in 2027. Short-term consumer inflation expectations edged up in April, likely reflecting news about trade tensions. But most measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2%, which supports the stabilisation of inflation around our target.

Turning now to our risk assessment, risks to economic growth remain tilted to the downside. A further escalation in global trade tensions and associated uncertainties could lower euro area growth by dampening exports and dragging down investment and consumption. A deterioration in financial market sentiment could lead to tighter financing conditions and greater risk aversion and make firms and households less willing to invest and consume.

Geopolitical tensions, such as Russia's unjustified war against Ukraine and the tragic conflict in the Middle East, remain a major source of uncertainty. By contrast, if trade and geopolitical tensions were resolved swiftly, this could lift sentiment and spur activity. A further increase in defence and infrastructure spending, together with productivity enhancing reforms, would also add to growth.

The outlook for euro area inflation is more uncertain than usual. As a result of the volatile global trade policy environment, falling energy prices and a stronger euro could put further downward pressure on inflation. This could be reinforced if higher tariffs led to lower demand for euro area exports and to countries with overcapacity rerouting their exports to the euro area.

Trade tensions could lead to greater volatility and risk aversion in financial markets, which would weigh on domestic demand and would thereby also lower inflation. By contrast, a fragmentation of global supply chains could raise inflation by pushing up import prices and adding to capacity constraints in the domestic economy. A boost in defence and infrastructure spending could also raise inflation over the medium term.

Extreme weather events and the unfolding climate crisis more broadly could drive up food prices by more than expected. Let's look at the financial and monetary conditions. Risk-free interest rates have remained broadly unchanged since our last meeting.

Equity prices have risen and corporate bond spreads have narrowed in response to more positive news about global trade policies and the improvement in global risk sentiment. Our past interest rate cuts continue to make corporate borrowing less expensive. The average interest rate on new loans to firms declined to 3.8 percent from 3.9 percent in March. The cost of issuing market-based debt was unchanged at 3.7 percent. Bank lending to firms continued to strengthen gradually, growing by an annual rate of 2.6 percent in April after 2.4 percent in March, while corporate bond issuance was subdued. The average interest rate on new mortgages stayed at 3.3 percent in April, while growth in mortgage lending increased to 1.9 percent. In line with our monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council thoroughly assessed the links between monetary policy and financial stability. While euro area banks remain resilient, broader financial stability risks remain elevated, in particular owing to highly uncertain and volatile global trade policies. Macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence against the build-up of financial vulnerabilities, enhancing resilience and preserving macroprudential space.

So, in conclusion, the Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate, the rate through which we steer the monetary policy stance, is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our 2% medium-term target.

Especially in current conditions of exceptional uncertainty, we will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. Our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook, in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.

And in any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our medium-term target, and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy transmission.

[Speaker 2] (17:09 - 17:27)
2025. In the meantime though, stay tuned for new episodes. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Paul Gordon.

If you like what you've heard, please subscribe, please leave us a review. And in the spirit of Europe, I'd like to end in Czech and say, Na shleden, until next time. Thanks for listening.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)