(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

(0:00 - 1:22)
You're listening to the ECB podcast, bringing you insights into the world of economics and central banking. My name is Stefania Secola. It's Thursday, the 5th of February 2026. 

For the first time this year, our governing council has just decided what's needed for prices to be stable in the euro area. Listen as President Christine Lagarde explains those decisions in our press conference. So the Vice President and I welcome you to our press conference. 

We would like to begin by congratulating Bulgaria on joining the euro area on January the 1st, 2026. We also warmly welcome Dimitar Radev, the governor of the Bulgarian National Bank. He joined the governing council today with voting capacity. 

Membership of the euro area has almost doubled since 1999 and is testimony to the attractiveness of the single currency and the enduring benefits of European integration. We will now report on the outcome of today's meeting. The governing council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged.

(1:23 - 1:54)
Our updated assessment reconfirms that inflation should stabilize at our 2% target in the medium term. The economy remains resilient in a challenging global environment. Low unemployment, solid private sector balance sheets, the gradual rollout of public spending on defence and infrastructure, and the supportive effects of our past interest rate cuts are underpinning growth.

(1:56 - 2:26)
At the same time, the outlook is still uncertain, owing particularly to ongoing global trade policy uncertainty and geopolitical tensions. We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilizes at our 2% target in the medium term. We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance.

(2:26 - 2:57)
In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path. The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.

(2:59 - 3:51)
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing, and will then explain our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. So, looking at the economic activity first. The economy grew by 0.3% in the fourth quarter of 2025, according to Eurostat's preliminary flash estimate. 

Growth has mainly been driven by services, notably in the information and communications sector. Manufacturing has been resilient despite the headwinds from global trade and geopolitical uncertainty. Momentum in construction is picking up, also supported by public investment.

(3:52 - 4:50)
The labour market continues to support incomes, even though demand for labour has cooled further. Unemployment stood at 6.2% in December, after 6.3% in November. Growing labour incomes, together with a lower household saving rate, should bolster private consumption. 

Government spending on defence and infrastructure should also contribute to domestic demand. Business investment should strengthen further, and surveys indicate that firms are increasingly investing in new digital technologies. At the same time, the external environment remains challenging, owing to higher tariffs and a stronger euro over the past year.

(4:50 - 7:19)
The Governing Council stresses the urgent need to strengthen the euro area and its economy in the present geopolitical context. Governments should prioritise sustainable public finances, strategic investment, and growth-enhancing structural reforms. Unlocking the full potential of the single market remains crucial. 

It is also vital to foster greater capital market integration by completing the Savings and Investments Union and the Banking Union to an ambitious timetable, and to rapidly adopt the regulation on the establishment of the Euro. Looking now at inflation. Inflation declined to 1.7% in January, from 2% in December, and 2.1% in November. 

Energy inflation dropped to minus 4.1%, after minus 1.9% in December, and 0.5% in November. While food price inflation increased to 2.7%, from 2.5% in December, and 2.4% in November. Inflation excluding energy and food eased to 2.2%, after 2.3% in December, and 2.4% in November. 

Goods inflation edged up to 0.4%, whereas services inflation declined to 3.2%, from 3.4% in December, and 3.5% in November. Indicators of underlying inflation have changed little over recent months, and remain consistent with our 2% medium-term target. Negotiated wage growth and forward-looking indicators, such as the ECB's wage tracker, and surveys on wage expectations, point to a continued moderation in labour costs.

(7:20 - 8:16)
However, the contribution to overall wage growth from payment over and above the negotiated wage component remains uncertain. Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2%, supporting the stabilisation of inflation around our target. On the risk, the euro area continues to face a volatile global policy environment. 

A renewed increase in uncertainty could weigh on demand. A deterioration in global financial market sentiment could also dampen demand. Further frictions in international trade could disrupt supply chains, reduce exports, and weaken consumption and investment.

(8:18 - 9:38)
Geopolitical tensions, in particular Russia's unjustified war against Ukraine, remain a major source of uncertainty. By contrast, planned defence and infrastructure spending, together with the adoption of productivity-enhancing reforms, and the adoption of new technologies by euro area firms, may drive up growth by more than expected, including through positive effects on business and consumer confidence. New trade agreements and a deeper integration of our European single market could also boost growth beyond current expectations. 

The outlook for inflation continues to be more uncertain than usual on account of the volatile global policy environment. Inflation could turn out to be lower if tariffs reduce demand for euro area exports by more than expected, and if countries with overcapacity increase further their exports to the euro area. Moreover, a stronger euro could bring inflation down beyond current expectations.

(9:39 - 11:37)
More volatile and risk-averse financial markets could weigh on demand and thereby also lower inflation. By contrast, inflation could turn out to be higher if there were a persistent upward shift in energy prices, or if more fragmented global supply chains pushed up import prices, curtailed the supply of critical raw materials, and added to capacity constraints in the euro area economy. If wage growth moderated more slowly, services inflation might come down later than expected. 

The planned boost in defence and infrastructure spending could also cause inflation to pick up over the medium term. Extreme weather events and the unfolding climate and nature crisis more broadly could drive up food prices by more than expected. So looking at financial and monetary conditions, market rates have come down since our last meeting, while global trade and geopolitical tensions temporarily increased financial market volatility. 

Bank lending rates for firms ticked up to 3.6 per cent in December from 3.5 per cent in November, as did the cost of issuing market-based debt. The average interest rate on new mortgages again held steady at 3.3 per cent in December. Bank lending to firms grew by 3 per cent on a yearly basis in December after 3.1 per cent in November and 2.9 per cent in October.

(11:39 - 13:05)
The issuance of corporate bonds rose by 3.4 per cent in December. According to our latest bank lending survey for euro area firms, demand for credit was up slightly in the fourth quarter, especially to finance inventories and working capital. At the same time, credit standards for business loans tightened again. 

Mortgage lending grew by 3 per cent after 2.9 per cent in November and 2.8 per cent in October in response to still rising demand for loans and an easing of credit standards. So to conclude, the Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our 2 per cent target in the medium term. 

We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. Our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it in light of the incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.

(13:05 - 13:37)
And in any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy transmission. Would you like to know more? Check out the show notes for visual material about the Governing Council decisions and the full transcript of the discussion with journalists during our press conference. The next press conference will be on 19 March 2026.

(13:38 - 13:47)
In the meantime, stay tuned for new episodes. You've been listening to the ECB podcast with Stefania Secola. If you like what you've heard, please subscribe and leave us a review.

(13:47 - 13:55)
And in the spirit of Europe Today, I'd like to end in Croatian and say Dovijenia! Until next time, thanks for listening.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)