(Transcribed by TurboScribe. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)

(0:02 - 0:22)
Have you ever noticed how talking about money can make people uncomfortable? Our finances affect almost everything we do in life, yet many of us avoid thinking about it. It feels too complicated, too boring or even a little scary. The truth is financial knowledge across Europe is very low, especially among women.

(0:22 - 0:41)
And this affects confidence, opportunity and the choices we make every day. You're listening to Euro Matters, a podcast by the European Central Bank. Every first Tuesday of the month in our In Conversation series, we unpack the stories, ideas and decisions shaping Europe's economy.

(0:41 - 0:50)
My name is Stefania Sequeira. Today I'm in conversation with the President of the European Central Bank, Christine Lagarde. President Lagarde, thank you for joining the podcast.

(0:50 - 1:10)
It's a great pleasure, Stefania. President Lagarde, why do you think so many people avoid topics like investing, retirement plan or even savings, right? So these topics, these financial topics make people so uncomfortable. Why is that? First of all, I think you're right.

(1:11 - 1:36)
People don't feel, most people don't feel very comfortable talking about these things. And it's probably a matter of culture, of background, childhood, things that go sort of deep inside your psyche. And it makes those topics a little bit alien to us.

(1:36 - 1:45)
And we feel uncomfortable about it. It is not the same in the United States, by the way. As you know, I've lived in the US a long period of my life.

(1:45 - 1:57)
And over there, there is no restriction, no discomfort. And people talk, you know, very casually about these things. So lots of factors you mentioned.

(1:57 - 2:20)
I think so. And I'm curious because I think also many in our audience, especially among the younger people, might be curious about you personally. And was there a time in your life where money or decisions about your finances felt really, really difficult? Well, there was a period of my life when I did not have much money at all.

(2:21 - 2:46)
You know, late teens and my years as a student, it was difficult to make, you know, to make the end of the month as simple as that. So I usually worked in the summer to earn as much money as I could. And I had to keep going for the rest of the year with very little by way of support from the family.

(2:46 - 2:54)
I wanted to be on my own. And that means sometimes finding it hard financially. Yeah, independence is not easy.

(2:55 - 3:07)
No, that's true. And we know in Europe, overall, financial knowledge and even interest about finance are very low. And even more so for women compared to men.

(3:08 - 3:29)
Can you tell us why is this a problem in general, but also from a central banker point of view? And what can be done about it? So financial literacy is generally rather low. And it's even lower for women in general. Now, you know, we're talking average here, but there is a gap.

(3:30 - 3:42)
Yes. Between men and women when it comes to financial literacy. And I think it's an issue both for the women themselves and for the economy at large.

(3:42 - 4:08)
So for the women themselves, many of us have a job. Many of us earn money. And if we don't know how to manage that money, if we don't have control over it, if we don't understand what to do with it or what money can do for us, then we are lacking and we are at risk of not being independent.

(4:08 - 4:21)
Because what happens then is somebody else is going to take care of that money. Somebody else is going to make decisions for you. And somebody else might be a good person, but somebody else might be not such a good person.

(4:21 - 5:09)
So I think it's important if we women want to have control over our destiny and be independent in the way in which we manage what we earn, we know enough about money, about investment, about borrowing, about a balance sheet, so that we can actually run our finances ourselves. It doesn't mean to say that we don't want to share that knowledge with a partner, whoever that is, but we should have enough understanding so that we can actually control ourselves. And for the economy, if, for instance, people invest in securities, in a small business, it's going to help leverage the economic activity.

(5:09 - 5:30)
Probably better, with a better sense of venture, with a better sense of risk-taking, but also possible rewards, than if you just store your earnings under the mattress or in a deposit bank account which earns you no interest. Yes, yes. And you mentioned a lot about women.

(5:30 - 7:37)
Madame Lagarde, how can we boost women's confidence and inspire them to take ownership of their finances? I think we at the ECB do a good job, and lots of national central banks are also doing a good job at propagating financial knowledge, explaining basic things, difference between a variable or a fixed interest rate, the maturity of a liability, the difference between a bond and a security. How do you manage your account? What's a balance sheet? And how do you see your commitment and your revenues? I think that there are lots of sources of knowledge, but I can assure you that when you look at some national central banks in your area or the work that we do at the ECB, there is a lot that can be learned. Yes, yes. 

And you mentioned if people and women could really take more charge of this. It was actually my grandmother who taught me almost everything about money. I was very, very lucky in my family. 

How was it about you? Was it a person or a situation that shaped the way you think about money? When I go way back, the memory that I have is of my mother suddenly being able to have her own bank account, being able to sign a cheque by herself without my father authorizing it or co-signing the cheque with her. And the sense of autonomy, independence and satisfaction that she had being able to do that on her own, to me was a signal that finance actually mattered and that if she wanted to do things that she wanted to do without any authorization, money was a conduit. Yes, and this is the great important role also the parents have with their children nowadays.

(7:37 - 7:53)
And I remember the first money I earned, my own money. I was 17 and I started working once a week in a shop. What do you remember about the first time you earned your own money and what did you do with it? I was much younger than you actually.

(7:54 - 8:08)
I started babysitting when I was 12, so those were my first cash. And then I did all possible jobs in the world that you could think of. I was a lifeguard.

(8:09 - 8:31)
I was working in the theater selling tickets or helping with the costumes, washing, ironing and sewing. I was a telex operator. I was helping with the accounting on the wholesale market.

(8:31 - 8:45)
I did so many, so many jobs. And every step of the way, I remember being so proud at the end of the month to collect the check. It was no longer banknotes as it often is with babysitting, at least in those days.

(8:45 - 9:05)
But a sense of pride. I earned it. And what was the best piece of financial advice you've ever received and from whom? I think my American father once said to me, it is not because you are 17 that you should not think about the day when you are 70.

(9:06 - 9:15)
So think about that. Invest today and don't rush. Play with time.

(9:15 - 9:25)
That was the best advice. Amazing. So I hope our listeners, especially the younger one, that really can think about, especially if you're 17 today, think about it.

(9:25 - 9:38)
And if you're 18 or 19. The little money that you invest at the age of 17, if you just keep at it and manage that smartly, can be a lot more when you're 70 and you want to have a little bit more money. Absolutely.

(9:39 - 10:06)
And let's imagine for a moment you could go back to your past self and you could give a piece of financial advice. What would that be? And I'm asking the woman, not the president of the ECB. I would probably say be a bit more attentive at how you spend and look at your balance on a more regular basis.

(10:07 - 10:09)
Okay. Those were the days. Yes.

(10:09 - 10:13)
Yes. So be careful about your money. Yeah.

(10:14 - 10:28)
And we are almost at the end of our episode. And when we get at this point, we always ask our guests about a hot tip on the topic we discussed today. What do you have for our listeners? So we're still talking about money.

(10:28 - 10:40)
Yes. And you know what I would say? Yes. As of the 1st of April, you can join a challenge that we throw at all of us, but women in particular.

(10:41 - 10:54)
And you can get on this app that we have organized where there are two benefits out of that. So go to the app, start walking. Yes.

(10:54 - 11:37)
It's good and healthy. And the more steps you walk, the more you can participate in a challenge that can make you eligible to a particular price and that can accrue to the country in which you decide to walk. But at the same time, it will also give you access to a lot of tips that will be available on this app and will tell you all about variable versus fixed interest rates, what is a balance sheet, how do you rather invest in securities or in bonds, what is yields, lots of things that you don't necessarily yet know about, but that you will learn about.

(11:37 - 11:41)
That's my tips for the day. Health and wealth. This is your tip through the challenge.

(11:42 - 11:51)
And actually to our listeners, you can find all the information about the challenge in the show notes. Make sure you participate. And good luck for winning.

(11:51 - 11:57)
Yes. And this really takes us to the end. Thank you so much for being with us in Conversation President Lagarde.

(11:57 - 12:00)
Great pleasure. Thank you, Stefania. Thank you.

(12:00 - 12:12)
This brings us to the end of this episode. You've been listening to Euro Matters with Stefania Sekola. If you like what you've heard, make sure you subscribe to the podcast wherever you're listening and leave us a review.

(12:13 - 12:20)
In the spirit of Europe, I'd like to end in French today and say à bientôt. Until next time, thanks for listening.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)